1:1 The book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, son of David, son of Abraham:
1:2 Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob begat Judah and his brothers.
1:3 And Judah begat Perez and Zerah out of Tamar, and Perez begat Hezron, and Hezron begat Aram.
1:4 And Aram begat Amminadab, and Amminadab begat Nahshon, and Nahshon begat Salmon.
1:5 And Salmon begat Boaz out of Rahab, and Boaz begat Obed out of Ruth, and Obed begat Jesse,
1:6 and Jesse begat David the king. And: David begat Solomon out of her who [was] of Uriah,
1:7 and Solomon begat Rehoboam, and Rehoboam begat Abijah, and Abijah begat Asaph.
1:8 And Asaph begat Jehoshaphat, and Jehoshaphat begat Joram, and Joram begat Uzziah.
1:9 And Uzziah begat Jotham, and Jotham begat Ahaz, and Ahaz begat Hezekiah.
1:10 And Hezekiah begat Manasseh, and Manasseh begat Amos, and Amos begat Josiah,
1:11 and Josiah begat Jeconiah and his brothers at the deportation to Babylon.
1:12 And after the deportation to Babylon: Jeconiah begat Shealtiel, and Shealtiel begat Zerubbabel,
1:13 and Zerubbabel begat Abiud, and Abiud begat Eliakim, and Eliakim begat Azor.
1:14 And Azor begat Zadok, and Zadok begat Achim, and Achim begat Eliud.
1:15 And Eliud begat Eleazar, and Eleazar begat Matthan, and Matthan begat Jacob,
1:16 and Jacob begat Joseph, the husband of Mary, out of whom was begotten Jesus, the One being called Christ.
1:17 Therefore all the generations from Abraham until David [were] fourteen generations, and from David until the deportation to Babylon fourteen generations, and from the deportation to Babylon until the Christ fourteen generations.
1:18 Now the birth of Jesus Christ was thus: His mother Mary, having been betrothed to Joseph, before their coming together was found having in womb from the Holy Spirit.
1:19 And Joseph her husband, being righteous and not willing to make an example of her, resolved to send her away secretly.
1:20 But [on] his having pondered these things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, “Joseph son of David, you should not be afraid to receive Mary [as] your wife, for that having been begotten in her is from the Holy Spirit.
1:21 And she will bear a Son, and you will call His name Jesus, for He will save His people from their sins.”
1:22 And all this has come to pass so that it might be fulfilled, that having been spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying,
1:23 “Behold, the virgin will have in womb, and she will bear a son, and they will call His name Immanuel,” which is, being translated, “God with us.”
1:24 And Joseph, having been awoken from sleep, did as the angel of the Lord commanded him and received his wife.
1:25 And he did not know her until she bore a Son, and he called His name Jesus.
2:1 Now [on] Jesus having been born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the king, behold, Magi from the east arrived in Jerusalem,
2:2 saying, “Where is the One having been born King of the Jews? For we saw His star in the east and came to worship Him.”
2:3 And King Herod, having heard, was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.
2:4 And having gathered together all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he was inquiring of them where the Christ is born.
2:5 And they said to him, “In Bethlehem of Judea, for thus it has been written through the prophet:
2:6 ‘And you, Bethlehem, land of Judah, are by no means least among the rulers of Judah, for out of you will come forth One leading, who will shepherd My people Israel.’”
2:7 Then Herod, having called the Magi secretly, learned exactly of them the time of the appearing star.
2:8 And having sent them to Bethlehem, he said, “Having gone, search carefully for the Child; and when you⁺ shall have found [Him], report to me, so that I also, having come, may worship Him.”
2:9 And having heard the king, they went, and behold, the star that they saw in the east went before them until, having come, it stood over where the Child was.
2:10 And having seen the star, they rejoiced [with] exceedingly great joy.
2:11 And having come into the house, they saw the Child with His mother Mary, and having fallen down, they worshiped Him. And having opened their treasures, they offered to Him gifts: gold and frankincense and myrrh.
2:12 And having been divinely warned in a dream not to return to Herod, through another way they withdrew to their country.
2:13 And [on] their having withdrawn, behold, an angel of the Lord appears to Joseph in a dream saying, “Having arisen, take the Child and His mother and flee into Egypt. And be there until I should tell you, for Herod is about to seek the Child to destroy Him.”
2:14 And having arisen, he took the Child and His mother by night and withdrew into Egypt,
2:15 and there he was until the death of Herod, so that it might be fulfilled, that having been spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying, “Out of Egypt I called My Son.”
2:16 Then Herod, having seen that he was mocked by the Magi, was exceedingly enraged. And having sent forth, he put to death all the boys in Bethlehem and in all its borders from two years old and under, according to the time that he learned exactly from the Magi.
2:17 Then was fulfilled that having been spoken through the prophet Jeremiah, saying:
2:18 “A voice was heard in Ramah, weeping and much mourning, Rachel weeping [for] her children; and she would not be comforted, because they are not.”
2:19 But [on] Herod having died, behold, an angel of the Lord appears in a dream to Joseph in Egypt,
2:20 saying, “Having arisen, take the Child and His mother and go into the land of Israel, for those seeking the life of the Child have died.”
2:21 And having arisen, he took the Child and His mother and came into the land of Israel.
2:22 But having heard that Archelaus reigns over Judea in place of his father Herod, he was afraid to depart [to] there. And having been divinely warned in a dream, he withdrew to the parts of Galilee.
2:23 And having come, he dwelt in a city being called Nazareth, so that it might be fulfilled, that having been spoken through the prophets, that “He will be called a Nazarene.”
3:1 Now in those days John the Baptist comes, preaching in the wilderness of Judea
3:2 and saying, “Repent, for the kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.”
3:3 For this is the one having been spoken of through Isaiah the prophet, saying, “A voice of one crying in the wilderness: ‘Prepare the way of the Lord; make straight His paths.’”
3:4 And John himself had his clothing of camel’s hair and a belt of leather around his waist, and his food was locusts and wild honey.
3:5 At that time they were going out to him—Jerusalem and all Judea and all the region around the Jordan.
3:6 And they were being baptized in the Jordan River by him, confessing their sins.
3:7 But having seen many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his baptism, he said to them, “Offspring of vipers, who warned you⁺ to flee from the coming wrath?
3:8 Therefore produce fruit worthy of repentance.
3:9 And do not think to say in yourselves, ‘We have Abraham [as] father.’ For I say to you⁺ that out of these stones God is able to raise up children to Abraham.
3:10 And already the ax is laid to the root of the trees; therefore every tree not producing good fruit is cut down and is thrown into fire.
3:11 I indeed baptize you⁺ in water unto repentance, but the One coming after me is mightier than I, of whom I am not sufficient to carry the sandals. He will baptize you⁺ in the Holy Spirit and fire,
3:12 whose winnowing fork [is] in His hand, and He will thoroughly cleanse His threshing floor and will gather His wheat into the barn; but He will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.”
3:13 Then Jesus comes from Galilee to the Jordan to John to be baptized by him.
3:14 But John was preventing Him, saying, “I have need to be baptized by You, and You come to me?”
3:15 But answering, Jesus said to him, “Permit [it] presently; for thus it is fitting to us to fulfill all righteousness.” Then he permits Him.
3:16 And having been baptized, Jesus immediately went up from the water; and behold, the heavens were opened, and He saw the Spirit of God descending as a dove and coming upon Him.
3:17 And behold, a voice out of the heavens, saying, “This is My Son, the Beloved, in whom I was well pleased.”
4:1 Then Jesus was led up into the wilderness by the Spirit to be tempted by the devil.
4:2 And having fasted forty days and forty nights, afterward He was hungry.
4:3 And the one tempting, having come to Him, said, “If You are the Son of God, speak, that these stones might become loaves.”
4:4 But answering, He said, “It has been written: ‘Not on bread alone shall the man live, but on every word coming out through the mouth of God.’”
4:5 Then the devil takes Him to the holy city, and he set Him on the pinnacle of the temple,
4:6 and he says to Him, “If You are the Son of God, throw Yourself down. For it has been written: ‘He will command His angels concerning You, and on hands they will lift You up, lest ever You might strike Your foot against a stone.’”
4:7 Jesus said to him, “Again it has been written: ‘You shall not test the Lord your God.’”
4:8 Again the devil takes Him to a mountain exceedingly high and shows to Him all the kingdoms of the world and their glory.
4:9 And he said to Him, “All these things I will give to You if, falling down, You worship me.”
4:10 Then Jesus says to him, “Go away, Satan! For it has been written: ‘You shall worship the Lord your God, and Him only shall you serve.’”
4:11 Then the devil leaves Him, and behold, angels came and were ministering to Him.
4:12 And having heard that John was delivered up, He withdrew into Galilee.
4:13 And having left Nazareth, having come, He dwelt at Capernaum, which [is] by the sea in the borders of Zebulun and Naphtali,
4:14 that it might be fulfilled, that having been spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying:
4:15 “Land of Zebulun and land of Naphtali, way of the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles—
4:16 the people sitting in darkness saw a great light, and to those sitting in the region and shadow of death, a light dawned on them.”
4:17 From that time Jesus began to proclaim and to say, “Repent, for the kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.”
4:18 And walking by the Sea of Galilee, He saw two brothers, Simon called Peter and his brother Andrew, casting a net into the sea; for they were fishermen.
4:19 And He says to them, “Come after Me, and I will make you⁺ fishers of men.”
4:20 And immediately, having left the nets, they followed Him.
4:21 And having gone on from there, He saw two others, brothers, James [son] of Zebedee and his brother John, in the boat with their father Zebedee, mending their nets; and He called them.
4:22 And immediately, having left the boat and their father, they followed Him.
4:23 And He was going about in all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and proclaiming the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every disease and every sickness among the people.
4:24 And the news of Him went out into all Syria. And they brought to Him all the ill having various diseases and oppressing torments, and being possessed by demons, and being epileptics, and paralytics, and He healed them.
4:25 And [there] followed Him many crowds from Galilee, and the Decapolis, and Jerusalem, and Judea, and beyond the Jordan.
5:1 And having seen the crowds, He went up onto the mountain. And [on] His having sat down, His disciples came to Him.
5:2 And having opened His mouth, He was teaching them, saying:
5:3 “Blessed [are] the poor in spirit, because theirs is the kingdom of the heavens.
5:4 Blessed [are] those mourning, because they will be comforted.
5:5 Blessed [are] the meek, because they will inherit the earth.
5:6 Blessed [are] those hungering and thirsting for righteousness, because they will be filled.
5:7 Blessed [are] the merciful, because they will receive mercy.
5:8 Blessed [are] the pure in heart, because they will see God.
5:9 Blessed [are] the peacemakers, because they will be called sons of God.
5:10 Blessed [are] those having been persecuted on account of righteousness, because theirs is the kingdom of the heavens.
5:11 Blessed are you⁺ when they may reproach you⁺ and may persecute [you] and may say all evil against you⁺, lying, on account of Me.
5:12 Rejoice and exult, because your⁺ reward [is] great in the heavens; for thus they persecuted the prophets before you⁺.
5:13 You⁺ are the salt of the earth. But if the salt should become tasteless, with what will it be salted? For nothing is it potent any longer except, having been cast out, to be trampled upon by men.
5:14 You⁺ are the light of the world. A city lying on a hill is not able to be hidden.
5:15 Nor do they light a lamp and put it under the basket, but upon the lampstand, and it shines to all those in the house.
5:16 Thus let your⁺ light shine before men, so that they may see your⁺ good works and may glorify your⁺ Father who [is] in the heavens.
5:17 Do not suppose that I came to abolish the Law or the Prophets. I did not come to abolish, but to fulfill.
5:18 For truly I say to you⁺, until the heaven and the earth should pass away, not even one iota, or one stroke of a letter, shall pass away from the Law, until everything should come to pass.
5:19 Whoever then may break one of the least of these commandments and may teach men thus, he will be called least in the kingdom of the heavens; but whoever may do and may teach [them], this one will be called great in the kingdom of the heavens.
5:20 For I say to you⁺ that unless your⁺ righteousness should abound more than [that] of the scribes and Pharisees, you⁺ shall certainly not enter into the kingdom of the heavens.
5:21 You⁺ heard that it was said to the ancients, ‘You shall not murder,’ and, ‘Whoever may murder will be liable to the judgment.’
5:22 But I say to you⁺ that everyone being angry with his brother will be liable to the judgment, and whoever may say to his brother, ‘Raca,’ will be liable to the Sanhedrin. But whoever may say, ‘Fool!’ will be liable to the Gehenna of fire.
5:23 Therefore, if you may offer your gift at the altar, and there may remember that your brother has something against you,
5:24 leave your gift there before the altar and first go, be reconciled to your brother, and then, having come, offer your gift.
5:25 Be agreeing quickly with your adversary while you are with him in the way, lest ever the adversary may deliver you to the judge, and the judge to the officer, and you will be cast into prison.
5:26 Truly I say to you, you shall never come out from there until you should pay back the last kodrantes.
5:27 You⁺ heard that it was said, ‘You shall not commit adultery.’
5:28 But I say to you⁺ that everyone looking at a woman in order to desire her already committed adultery with her in his heart.
5:29 Now if your right eye causes you to stumble, pluck it out and cast [it] from you. For it is better for you that one of your members should perish and not [that] your whole body should be cast into Gehenna.
5:30 And if your right hand causes you to stumble, cut it off and cast [it] from you. For it is better for you that one of your members should perish and not [that] your whole body should go away into Gehenna.
5:31 And it was said, ‘Whoever may send away his wife, let him give to her a certificate of divorce.’
5:32 But I say to you⁺ that everyone sending away his wife, except [for] the reason of sexual immorality, causes her to commit adultery. And whoever shall marry her [who] has been sent away, he commits adultery.
5:33 Again, you⁺ heard that it was said to the ancients, ‘You shall not swear falsely, but you shall repay your oaths to the Lord.’
5:34 But I say to you⁺ not to swear at all: neither by heaven, because it is the throne of God;
5:35 nor by the earth, because it is the footstool for His feet; nor by Jerusalem, because it is the city of the great King.
5:36 Nor may you swear by your head, because you are not able to make one hair white or black.
5:37 But let your⁺ word ‘Yes’ be ‘Yes,’ [and] ‘No,’ ‘No.’ And that which [is] more than these comes from the evil one.
5:38 You⁺ heard that it was said, ‘Eye for eye and tooth for tooth.’
5:39 But I say to you⁺ not to resist the evil [person]. But whoever may strike you on your right cheek, turn to him also the other.
5:40 And the one wanting to sue you and to take your tunic, yield to him also the cloak.
5:41 And whoever will compel you [to go] one milion, go with him two.
5:42 To the one asking you, you should give, and from the one wanting to borrow from you, you should not turn away.
5:43 You⁺ heard that it was said, ‘You shall love your neighbor and shall hate your enemy.’
5:44 But I say to you⁺, love your⁺ enemies and pray for those persecuting you⁺,
5:45 so that you⁺ may be sons of your⁺ Father who [is] in the heavens. For He makes His sun rise on evil and good, and He sends rain on righteous and unrighteous.
5:46 For if you⁺ love those loving you⁺, what reward do you⁺ have? Do not also the tax collectors do the same?
5:47 And if you⁺ greet only your⁺ brothers, what extraordinary [thing] do you⁺ do? Do not also the Gentiles do the same?
5:48 You⁺ shall be perfect, therefore, as your⁺ heavenly Father is perfect.[]
6:1 [“] And beware not to do your⁺ righteousness before men in order to be seen by them. Otherwise, you⁺ have no reward from your⁺ Father who [is] in the heavens.
6:2 Therefore, when you may do charity, do not sound a trumpet before you, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets so that they may be glorified by men. Truly I say to you⁺, they have their reward in full.
6:3 But [in] your doing charity, do not let your left [hand] know what your right hand is doing,
6:4 so that your charity may be in secret. And your Father, the One seeing in secret, will reward to you.
6:5 And when you⁺ may pray, you⁺ shall not be like the hypocrites, because they love to pray standing in the synagogues and on the corners of the streets so that they might be seen by men. Truly I say to you⁺, they have their reward in full.
6:6 But you, when you may pray, enter into your inner room, and having shut your door, pray to your Father, the One in secret. And your Father, the One seeing in secret, will reward to you.
6:7 And praying, do not use vain repetitions like the Gentiles, for they think that in their many words they will be heard.
6:8 Therefore do not be like them, for your⁺ Father knows of what things you⁺ have need before your⁺ asking Him.
6:9 Therefore pray you⁺ this way: ‘Our Father who [is] in the heavens, hallowed be Your name.
6:10 Your kingdom come. Your will be done, as in heaven, also upon earth.
6:11 Give us today our necessary bread.
6:12 And forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors.
6:13 And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.’
6:14 For if you⁺ forgive men their trespasses, your⁺ heavenly Father will also forgive you⁺.
6:15 But if you⁺ do not forgive men their trespasses, neither will your⁺ Father forgive your⁺ trespasses.
6:16 And when you⁺ may fast, do not be as the hypocrites, gloomy-faced; for they disfigure their faces so that they might appear to men [as] fasting. Truly I say to you⁺, they have their reward in full.
6:17 But you, fasting, anoint your head and wash your face,
6:18 so that you might not appear to men [as] fasting, but to your Father, the One in secret. And your Father, the One seeing in secret, will reward you.
6:19 Do not treasure up for yourselves treasures on the earth, where moth and rust disfigure, and where thieves break in and steal.
6:20 But treasure up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust disfigure, and where thieves do not break in, nor do they steal.
6:21 For where your treasure is, there will be also your heart.
6:22 The lamp of the body is the eye. Therefore if your eye is sound, your whole body will be full of light.
6:23 But if your eye is evil, your whole body will be full of darkness. If then the light that [is] in you is darkness, how great [is] the darkness!
6:24 No one is able to serve two masters. For either he will hate the one and he will love the other, or he will hold to one and he will despise the other. You⁺ are not able to serve God and mammon.
6:25 Because of this I say to you⁺, do not be anxious for your⁺ life, what you⁺ might eat or what you⁺ might drink, nor for your⁺ body, what you⁺ might put on. Is not life more than food, and the body [more] than clothing?
6:26 Look at the birds of the sky, that they do not sow, nor do they reap, nor do they gather into barns, and your⁺ heavenly Father feeds them. Are you⁺ not much more valuable than they?
6:27 And who of you⁺, being anxious, is able to add to his lifespan one cubit?
6:28 And why are you⁺ anxious about clothing? Consider carefully the lilies of the field, how they grow: They do not labor, nor do they spin.
6:29 Yet I say to you⁺ that not even Solomon in all his glory was clothed like one of these.
6:30 But if God thus clothes the grass of the field, being today and tomorrow being thrown into the furnace, [will He] not much more you⁺, O little of faith?
6:31 Therefore do not be anxious, saying, ‘What shall we eat?’ or ‘What shall we drink?’ or ‘[With] what shall we be clothed?’
6:32 For the nations seek after all these things. For your⁺ heavenly Father knows that you⁺ have need of all of these.
6:33 But seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these things will be added to you⁺.
6:34 Therefore do not be anxious for tomorrow, for tomorrow will be anxious for itself. Sufficient to the day [is] its evil.[]
7:1 [“] Do not judge, that you⁺ may not be judged.
7:2 For in what judgment you⁺ judge, you⁺ will be judged; and in what measure you⁺ measure, it will be measured to you⁺.
7:3 And why do you look at the splinter that [is] in the eye of your brother, but not notice the beam in your [own] eye?
7:4 Or how will you say to your brother, ‘Permit that I might cast out the splinter from your eye,’ and behold, the beam [is] in your eye?
7:5 Hypocrite! First cast out the beam from your eye, and then you will see clearly to cast out the splinter from the eye of your brother.
7:6 Do not give what [is] holy to the dogs, nor cast your⁺ pearls before the pigs, lest they will trample them among their feet and, having turned, tear you⁺ to pieces.
7:7 Ask, and it will be given to you⁺; seek, and you⁺ will find; knock, and it will be opened to you⁺.
7:8 For everyone asking receives; and the one seeking finds; and to the one knocking, it will be opened.
7:9 Or which man is of you⁺ who, [if] his son will ask for bread, will give to him a stone,
7:10 or also, [if] he will ask for a fish, will give to him a serpent?
7:11 Therefore if you⁺, being evil, know to give good gifts to your⁺ children, how much more will your⁺ Father who [is] in the heavens give good things to those asking Him!
7:12 All things, therefore, as many as you⁺ may want that men may do to you⁺, so also you⁺ do to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets.
7:13 Enter through the narrow gate, because wide [is] the gate and broad the way that is leading to destruction, and many are those entering through it.
7:14 For narrow [is] the gate and compressed the way that [is] leading to life, and few are those finding it.
7:15 Beware of the false prophets, who come to you⁺ in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly are ravenous wolves.
7:16 From their fruits you⁺ will recognize them. [Do] they gather grapes from thorns, or figs from thistles?
7:17 Thus every good tree produces good fruits, but the rotten tree produces evil fruits.
7:18 A good tree is not able to produce evil fruits, nor a rotten tree to produce good fruits.
7:19 Every tree not producing good fruit is cut down and is thrown into fire.
7:20 Therefore from their fruits you⁺ will recognize them.
7:21 Not everyone who [is] saying to Me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter into the kingdom of the heavens, but the one doing the will of My Father who [is] in the heavens.
7:22 Many will say to Me in that day, ‘Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in Your name, and [in] Your name cast out demons, and in Your name do many miracles?’
7:23 And then I will profess to them, ‘I never knew you⁺; depart from Me, [you] working lawlessness!’
7:24 Therefore everyone who hears these words of Mine and does them will be likened to a wise man who built his house on the rock.
7:25 And the rain came down, and the rivers came, and the winds blew and fell upon that house; and it did not fall, for it had been founded on the rock.
7:26 And everyone who [is] hearing these words of Mine and not doing them will be likened to a foolish man who built his house on the sand.
7:27 And the rain came down, and the rivers came, and the winds blew and beat upon that house; and it fell—and its fall was great!”
7:28 And it came to pass when Jesus finished these words [that] the crowds were astonished at His teaching.
7:29 For He was teaching them as One having authority, and not as their scribes.
8:1 And [on] His having come down from the mountain, many crowds followed Him.
8:2 And behold, a leper, having come, was kneeling down to Him, saying, “Lord, if You are willing, You are able to cleanse me.”
8:3 And having stretched out the hand, He touched him, saying, “I am willing; be cleansed!” And immediately his leprosy was cleansed.
8:4 And Jesus says to him, “See that you tell no one. But go, show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a testimony to them.”
8:5 And [on] His having entered into Capernaum, a centurion came to Him, imploring Him
8:6 and saying, “Lord, my servant is laid in the house a paralytic, terribly tormented.”
8:7 And He says to him, “I, having gone, will heal him.”
8:8 But answering, the centurion said, “Lord, I am not fit that You should enter under my roof; but only say a word, and my servant will be healed.
8:9 For I also am a man under authority, having soldiers under me. And I say to this one, ‘Go,’ and he goes; and to another, ‘Come,’ and he comes; and to my servant, ‘Do this,’ and he does.”
8:10 And having heard, Jesus marveled and said to those following, “Truly I say to you⁺, with no one in Israel did I find such great faith.
8:11 And I say to you⁺ that many will come from east and west and will recline with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of the heavens.
8:12 But the sons of the kingdom will be cast out into the outer darkness—there will be weeping and gnashing of the teeth.”
8:13 And Jesus said to the centurion, “Go! As you believed, let it be to you.” And his servant was healed in that very hour.
8:14 And Jesus, having come to the house of Peter, saw his mother-in-law laid and having a fever.
8:15 And He touched her hand, and the fever left her; and she arose and was serving Him.
8:16 And evening having come, they brought to Him many being possessed by demons, and He cast out the spirits with a word and healed all those being ill,
8:17 so that it might be fulfilled, that having been spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying: “He Himself took our infirmities, and carried the diseases.”
8:18 And Jesus, having seen a great crowd around Him, commanded to go away to the other side.
8:19 And having come, one scribe said to Him, “Teacher, I will follow You wherever You may go.”
8:20 And Jesus says to him, “The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere He might lay the head.”
8:21 And another of His disciples said to Him, “Lord, allow me first to go away and to bury my father.”
8:22 But Jesus says to him, “Follow Me, and leave the dead to bury their own dead.”
8:23 And [on] His having entered into the boat, His disciples followed Him.
8:24 And behold, a great storm arose in the sea, so that the boat was being covered by the waves; but He Himself was sleeping.
8:25 And having come, they awoke Him, saying, “Lord, save us! We are perishing!”
8:26 And He says to them, “Why are you⁺ cowardly, O little of faith?” Then, having arisen, He rebuked the winds and the sea, and there was a great calm.
8:27 And the men marveled, saying, “What kind is this, that even the winds and the sea obey Him?”
8:28 And [on] His having come to the other side, to the region of the Gadarenes, two [men] being possessed by demons met Him, coming out of the tombs, extremely violent, so as for no one to have strength to pass by that way.
8:29 And behold, they cried out, saying, “What to us and to You, Son of God? Did You come here to torment us before the time?”
8:30 Now there was far off from them a herd of many pigs feeding.
8:31 And the demons were imploring Him, saying, “If You cast us out, send us away into the herd of pigs.”
8:32 And He said to them, “Go!” And having gone out, they went away into the pigs, and behold, all the herd rushed down the steep bank into the sea and died in the waters.
8:33 And those feeding [them] fled, and having gone away into the city, they related everything, and the [matter] of those being possessed by demons.
8:34 And behold, all the city went out to meet Jesus. And having seen Him, they implored [Him] that He might depart from their borders.
9:1 And having entered into a boat, He crossed over, and He came into [His] own city.
9:2 And behold, they were bringing to Him a paralytic lying on a bed. And Jesus, having seen their faith, said to the paralytic, “Take courage, child; your sins are forgiven.”
9:3 And behold, some of the scribes said to themselves, “This One blasphemes!”
9:4 And Jesus, having known their thoughts, said, “Why do you⁺ think evil in your⁺ hearts?
9:5 For which is easier: to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Arise and walk’?
9:6 But so that you⁺ may know that the Son of Man has authority on the earth to forgive sins...” Then He says to the paralytic, “Having arisen, take up your mat and go to your house.”
9:7 And having arisen, he went away to his house.
9:8 And the crowds, having seen, feared and glorified God, the One having given such authority to men.
9:9 And Jesus, passing on from there, saw a man called Matthew sitting at the tax booth, and He says to him, “Follow Me.” And having risen up, he followed Him.
9:10 And it came to pass [in] His reclining in the house, that behold, many tax collectors and sinners, having come, were reclining with Jesus and His disciples.
9:11 And having seen, the Pharisees were saying to His disciples, “Why does your⁺ Teacher eat with the tax collectors and sinners?”
9:12 But having heard, He said, “Those being strong have no need of a physician, but those being ill.
9:13 But having gone, learn what is ‘I desire mercy and not sacrifice.’ For I did not come to call the righteous, but sinners.”
9:14 Then the disciples of John come to Him, saying, “Why do we and the Pharisees fast much, but Your disciples do not fast?”
9:15 And Jesus said to them, “Are the sons of the bridechamber able to mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them? But days will come when the bridegroom shall have been taken away from them, and then they will fast.
9:16 But no one puts a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old garment, for the filling up of it pulls away from the garment, and a worse tear happens.
9:17 Nor do they put new wine into old wineskins; and if otherwise, the wineskins are burst, and the wine is poured out, and the wineskins are destroyed. But they put new wine into new wineskins, and both are preserved.”
9:18 [In] His speaking these things to them, behold, one ruler, having come, was kneeling down to Him, saying, “My daughter just now died, but having come, lay Your hand upon her, and she will live.”
9:19 And having arisen, Jesus was following him, as well as His disciples.
9:20 And behold, a woman having a flow of blood twelve years, having come behind [Him], touched the fringe of His garment.
9:21 For she was saying within herself, “If only I shall touch His garment, I will be saved.”
9:22 And Jesus, having turned and having seen her, said, “Take courage, daughter; your faith has saved you.” And the woman was saved from that hour.
9:23 And Jesus, having come into the house of the ruler and having seen the flute players and the crowd making a commotion,
9:24 was saying, “Withdraw, for the girl did not die, but sleeps.” And they were laughing at Him.
9:25 And when the crowd was put outside, having entered, He took hold of her hand, and the girl arose.
9:26 And this report went out into all that land.
9:27 And Jesus passing on from there, two blind [men] followed Him, crying out and saying, “Have mercy on us, Son of David!”
9:28 And having come into the house, the blind [men] came to Him, and Jesus says to them, “Do you⁺ believe that I am able to do this?” They say to Him, “Yes, Lord.”
9:29 Then He touched their eyes, saying, “According to your⁺ faith let it be to you⁺.”
9:30 And their eyes were opened. And Jesus strictly instructed them, saying, “See, let no one know!”
9:31 But having gone out, they reported [about] Him in all that land.
9:32 And [in] their going out, behold, they brought to Him a mute man possessed by a demon.
9:33 And the demon having been cast out, the mute [man] spoke. And the crowds marveled, saying, “Never thus was it seen in Israel!”
9:34 But the Pharisees were saying, “By the prince of the demons He casts out the demons.”
9:35 And Jesus was going throughout all the cities and the villages, teaching in their synagogues, and proclaiming the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every disease and every sickness.
9:36 And having seen the crowds, He was moved with compassion for them, because they were wearied and cast away, as sheep not having a shepherd.
9:37 Then He says to His disciples, “The harvest indeed [is] much, but the workers [are] few.
9:38 Therefore implore the Lord of the harvest, that He might put forth workers into His harvest.”
10:1 And having summoned His twelve disciples, He gave them authority over unclean spirits, so as to cast them out and to heal every disease and every sickness.
10:2 And these are the names of the twelve apostles: first Simon who [is] called Peter, and his brother Andrew; and James the [son] of Zebedee, and his brother John;
10:3 Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew the tax collector; James the [son] of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus;
10:4 Simon the Cananean, and Judas Iscariot, the one also having betrayed Him.
10:5 These twelve Jesus sent forth, having instructed them, saying: “Do not go into the way of the Gentiles, and into a city of the Samaritans do not enter.
10:6 But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
10:7 And going, proclaim, saying, ‘The kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.’
10:8 Heal the ailing, raise the dead, cleanse the lepers, cast out demons. Freely you⁺ received; freely give.
10:9 Acquire neither gold nor silver nor copper in your⁺ belts,
10:10 nor a bag for the way, nor two tunics, nor sandals, nor a staff; for the worker [is] worthy of his food.
10:11 And into whatever city or village you⁺ may enter, inquire who is worthy in it, and remain there until you⁺ may go out.
10:12 And entering into the house, greet it.
10:13 And if indeed the house is worthy, let your⁺ peace come upon it; but if it is not worthy, let your⁺ peace return to you⁺.
10:14 And whoever may not receive you⁺ nor hear your⁺ words, going forth out of the house or that city, shake off the dust of your⁺ feet.
10:15 Truly I say to you⁺, it will be more bearable for the land of Sodom and of Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city.
10:16 Behold, I send you⁺ forth as sheep in the midst of wolves; therefore be shrewd as the serpents and innocent as the doves.
10:17 But beware of men; for they will deliver you⁺ up into the councils, and in their synagogues they will flog you⁺.
10:18 And you⁺ will be led before governors and also kings on account of Me, for a testimony to them and to the nations.
10:19 And when they may deliver you⁺ up, do not be anxious how or what you⁺ shall speak; for it will be given to you⁺ in that hour what you⁺ shall speak.
10:20 For you⁺ are not the ones speaking, but the Spirit of your⁺ Father speaking in you⁺.
10:21 And brother will deliver up brother to death, and father, child; and children will rise up against parents and will put them to death.
10:22 And you⁺ will be hated by all because of My name; but the one having endured to the end, this one will be saved.
10:23 And when they may persecute you⁺ in one city, flee to the other. For truly I say to you⁺, you⁺ shall not have completed the cities of Israel until the Son of Man shall come.
10:24 A disciple is not above the teacher, nor a servant above his master.
10:25 Aufficient to the disciple [is] that he may become like his teacher, and the servant like his master. If the master of the house they have called Beelzebul, how much more the members of his household!
10:26 Therefore do not fear them. For nothing is concealed that will not be revealed, and hidden that will not be known.
10:27 What I say to you⁺ in the darkness, say in the light; and what you⁺ hear in the ear, proclaim upon the housetops.
10:28 And do not be afraid of those killing the body but not being able to kill the soul. But fear, rather, the One being able to destroy both soul and body in Gehenna.
10:29 Are not two sparrows sold for an assarion? And not one of them will fall to the ground apart from your⁺ Father.
10:30 And even the hairs of your⁺ head are all numbered.
10:31 Therefore do not be afraid; you⁺ are more valuable than many sparrows.
10:32 Therefore everyone who will confess in Me before men, I will also confess in him before My Father who [is] in the heavens.
10:33 But whoever shall deny Me before men, I also will deny him before My Father who [is] in the heavens.
10:34 Do not think that I came to cast peace upon the earth; I did not come to cast peace, but a sword.
10:35 For I came to set at variance: ‘A man against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.
10:36 And the enemies of the man [are] the members of his household.’
10:37 The one loving father or mother above Me is not worthy of Me, and the one loving son or daughter above Me is not worthy of Me.
10:38 And whoever does not take his cross and follow after Me is not worthy of Me.
10:39 The one having found his life will lose it, and the one having lost his life on account of Me will find it.
10:40 The one receiving you⁺ receives Me, and the one receiving Me receives the One having sent Me.
10:41 The one receiving a prophet in the name of a prophet will receive the reward of a prophet, and the one receiving a righteous [man] in the name of a righteous [man] will receive the reward of a righteous [man].
10:42 And whoever shall give to drink to one of these little ones merely a cup of cold [water] in the name of a disciple, truly I say to you⁺, he shall certainly not lose his reward.”
11:1 And it came to pass, when Jesus finished commanding His twelve disciples, [that] He departed from there to teach and to preach in their cities.
11:2 And John, having heard in the prison the works of the Christ, having sent through his disciples,
11:3 said to Him, “Are You the coming One, or do we look for another?”
11:4 And answering, Jesus said to them, “Having gone, report to John what you⁺ hear and see:
11:5 The blind receive sight and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed and the deaf hear and the dead are raised and the poor have good news proclaimed.
11:6 And blessed is [the one] who shall not be caused to stumble in Me.”
11:7 And [as] these are going, Jesus began to speak to the crowds about John: “What did you⁺ go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind?
11:8 But what did you⁺ go out to see? A man having been dressed in soft [garments]? Behold, those wearing soft [garments] are in the houses of kings.
11:9 But what did you⁺ go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I say to you⁺, and one more than a prophet.
11:10 This is he about whom it has been written: ‘Behold, I send My messenger before Your face, who will prepare Your way before You.’
11:11 Truly I say to you⁺, among [those] born of women there has not risen one greater than John the Baptist. Yet the least in the kingdom of the heavens is greater than he.
11:12 And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of the heavens is subject to violence, and the violent seize it.
11:13 For all the Prophets and the Law prophesied until John.
11:14 And if you⁺ are willing to receive [it], he is Elijah, the one being about to come.
11:15 The one having ears, let him hear!
11:16 But to what will I liken this generation? It is like children sitting in the marketplaces and calling out to others,
11:17 saying: ‘We played the flute for you⁺, and you⁺ did not dance; we sang a dirge, and you⁺ did not mourn.’
11:18 For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, ‘He has a demon!’
11:19 The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, ‘Behold, a man, a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and of sinners!’ But wisdom was justified from her works.”
11:20 Then He began to reproach the cities in which most of His miracles happened, because they did not repent.
11:21 “Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the miracles having happened in you⁺ had happened in Tyre and Sidon, long ago in sackcloth and ashes they would have repented.
11:22 But I say to you⁺, for Tyre and Sidon it will be more bearable in the day of judgment than for you⁺.
11:23 And you, Capernaum, to heaven will you be lifted up? To Hades you will be brought down! For if the miracles having happened in you had happened in Sodom, it would have remained until [this] day.
11:24 But I say to you⁺ that it will be more bearable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment than for you.”
11:25 In that time, answering, Jesus said, “I acknowledge You, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth, because You hid these things from the wise and intelligent, and You revealed them to little children.
11:26 Yes, Father, because of this it was good pleasure before You.
11:27 All things were delivered to Me by My Father. And no one knows the Son except the Father, nor does anyone know the Father except the Son and [the one] to whom the Son may resolve to reveal [Him].
11:28 Come to Me, all those toiling and burdened, and I will give you⁺ rest.
11:29 Take up My yoke upon you⁺ and learn from Me, because I am gentle and humble [in] heart, and you⁺ will find rest [for] your⁺ souls.
11:30 For My yoke [is] easy and My burden is light.”
12:1 At that time Jesus went through the grainfields on the Sabbaths, and His disciples were hungry, and they began to pluck the heads of grain and to eat.
12:2 And the Pharisees, having seen, said to Him, “Behold, Your disciples do what it is not lawful to do on a Sabbath.”
12:3 And He said to them, “Did you⁺ not read what David did when he was hungry, and those with him—
12:4 how he entered into the house of God, and they ate the loaves of the presentation, which it was not lawful for him to eat, nor for those with him, except for the priests only?
12:5 Or did you⁺ not read in the Law that on the Sabbath the priests in the temple profane the Sabbath and are guiltless?
12:6 But I say to you⁺ that a greater One than the temple is here.
12:7 But if you⁺ had known what is ‘I desire mercy and not sacrifice,’ then you⁺ would not have condemned the guiltless.
12:8 For the Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.”
12:9 And having departed from there, He went into their synagogue.
12:10 And behold, a man having a withered hand, and they asked Him, saying, “Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbaths?” so that they might accuse Him.
12:11 And He said to them, “What man will there be of you⁺ who will have one sheep, and if this one should fall into a pit on the Sabbaths, will not take hold of it and will raise [it] up?
12:12 How much more valuable, therefore, [is] a man than a sheep! Therefore it is lawful on the Sabbaths to do good.”
12:13 Then He says to the man, “Stretch out your hand.” And he stretched [it] out, and it was restored, sound as the other.
12:14 And the Pharisees, having gone out, took counsel against Him, how they might destroy Him.
12:15 And Jesus, having known, withdrew from there. And many crowds followed Him, and He healed them all,
12:16 and He warned them that they should not make Him known,
12:17 so that it might be fulfilled, that having been spoken by Isaiah the prophet, saying:
12:18 “Behold My servant, whom I chose, My Beloved, in whom My soul was well pleased. I will put My Spirit upon Him, and He will proclaim judgment to the nations.
12:19 He will not quarrel, nor will He cry out; nor will anyone hear His voice in the streets.
12:20 A bruised reed He will not break, and a smoldering wick He will not quench, until He should put forth judgment to victory.
12:21 And in His name the nations will hope.”
12:22 Then was brought to Him one possessed by a demon, blind and mute, and He healed him, in order for the mute [man] to speak and to see.
12:23 And all the crowds were amazed and were saying, “Is this the Son of David?”
12:24 And the Pharisees, having heard, said, “This [man] does not cast out the demons except by Beelzebul, ruler of the demons.”
12:25 And knowing their thoughts, He said to them, “Every kingdom having been divided against itself is brought to desolation, and every city or house having been divided against itself will not stand.
12:26 And if Satan casts out Satan, he was divided against himself. How then will his kingdom stand?
12:27 And if I cast out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your⁺ sons cast [them] out? Because of this, they will be your⁺ judges.
12:28 But if I cast out demons by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God has come upon you⁺.
12:29 Or how is anyone able to enter into the house of the strong [man] and to plunder his goods, unless first he should bind the strong [man]? And then he will plunder his house.
12:30 The one not being with Me is against Me, and the one not gathering with Me scatters.
12:31 Because of this I say to you⁺, every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven men; but the blasphemy of the Spirit will not be forgiven.
12:32 And whoever may speak a word against the Son of Man, it will be forgiven him; but whoever may speak against the Holy Spirit, it will not be forgiven him—neither in this age nor in the coming one.
12:33 Either make the tree good and its fruit good, or make the tree rotten and its fruit rotten. For by the fruit, the tree is known.
12:34 Offspring of vipers, how are you⁺ able to speak good things, being evil? For out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks.
12:35 The good man out of his good treasure puts forth good things, and the evil man out of his evil treasure puts forth evil things.
12:36 And I say to you⁺ that every careless word that men will speak, they will give an account concerning it in the day of judgment.
12:37 For by your words you will be justified, and by your words you will be condemned.”
12:38 Then some of the scribes and Pharisees answered Him, saying, “Teacher, we want to see a sign from You.”
12:39 And answering, He said to them, “An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and no sign will be given to it except the sign of Jonah the prophet.
12:40 For just as Jonah was in the belly of the great fish three days and three nights, so the Son of Man will be in the heart of the earth three days and three nights.
12:41 The men of Nineveh will stand up in the judgment with this generation and will condemn it; for they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold, One greater than Jonah [is] here.
12:42 The Queen of the South will rise up in the judgment with this generation and will condemn it; for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold, One greater than Solomon is here.
12:43 Now when the unclean spirit may go out from the man, it passes through waterless places seeking rest and does not find [it].
12:44 Then it says, ‘I will return to my house from which I came out.’ And having come, it finds [it] being unoccupied, and swept, and put in order.
12:45 Then it goes and takes along with itself seven other spirits more evil than itself, and having entered, they dwell there; and the last of that man becomes worse than the first. So also will it be to this evil generation.”
12:46 Now [in] His still speaking to the crowds, behold, His mother and brothers had stood outside, seeking to speak to Him.
12:47 And someone said to Him, “Behold, Your mother and Your brothers are standing outside, seeking to speak to You.”
12:48 And answering, He said to the one speaking to Him, “Who is My mother, and who are My brothers?”
12:49 And having stretched out His hand to His disciples, He said, “Behold, My mother and My brothers.
12:50 For whoever shall do the will of My Father who [is] in the heavens, he is My brother and sister and mother.”
13:1 In that day, Jesus, having gone out of the house, was sitting by the sea.
13:2 And many crowds were gathered together to Him so that He, having entered into a boat, sat down, and all the crowd stood on the shore.
13:3 And He spoke to them many things in parables, saying, “Behold, the one sowing went out to sow.
13:4 And in his sowing, some indeed fell along the path, and the birds, having come, devoured them.
13:5 And others fell upon the rocky [places], where it did not have much soil, and immediately it sprang up because of it not having depth of soil.
13:6 And the sun having risen, they were scorched, and because of not having root, they withered.
13:7 And others fell upon the thorns, and the thorns came up and choked them.
13:8 And others fell upon the good soil and were giving fruit—some indeed a hundredfold, and some sixty, and some thirty.
13:9 The one having ears, let him hear.”
13:10 And having come, the disciples said to Him, “Why do You speak to them in parables?”
13:11 And answering, He said to them, “Because to you⁺ it has been given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of the heavens, but to these it has not been given.
13:12 For whoever has, [it] will be given to him, and he will be in abundance. And whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.
13:13 Because of this I speak to them in parables: ‘Because seeing, they do not see, and hearing, they do not hear, nor do they understand.’
13:14 And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah, saying: ‘In hearing you⁺ will hear and never understand; and seeing, you⁺ will see and never perceive.
13:15 For the heart of this people grew dull, and they barely hear with the ears, and they closed their eyes, lest ever they might see with the eyes, and might hear with the ears, and might understand with the heart, and might return, and I will heal them.’
13:16 But blessed [are] your⁺ eyes because they see, and your⁺ ears because they hear.
13:17 For truly I say to you⁺ that many prophets and righteous [men] desired to see what you⁺ see and did not see, and to hear what you⁺ hear and did not hear.
13:18 You⁺, therefore, hear the parable of the one having sown:
13:19 Everyone hearing the word of the kingdom and not understanding, the evil one comes and snatches away that having been sown in his heart. This is the one having been sown along the path.
13:20 And that having been sown upon the rocky [places], this is the one hearing the word and immediately receiving it with joy.
13:21 And he has no root in himself, but is temporary. But [on] tribulation or persecution having come because of the word, immediately he is caused to stumble.
13:22 And that having been sown among the thorns, this is the one hearing the word, and the anxiety of this age and the deceit of riches choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.
13:23 But that having been sown on the good soil, this is the one hearing the word and understanding, who indeed bears fruit and produces—some indeed a hundredfold, and some sixty, and some thirty.”
13:24 He put before them another parable, saying, “The kingdom of the heavens was likened to a man having sown good seed in his field.
13:25 And while the men are sleeping, his enemy came and sowed weeds in the midst of the wheat, and went away.
13:26 And when the plants sprouted and produced fruit, then the weeds also appeared.
13:27 And having come, the servants of the master of the house said to him, ‘Sir, did you not sow good seed in your field? From where, then, does it have weeds?’
13:28 And he said to them, ‘An enemy did this.’ And the servants said to him, ‘Then do you desire [that], having gone away, we should collect them?’
13:29 And he said, ‘No, lest collecting the weeds, you⁺ might uproot the wheat with them.
13:30 Allow both to grow together until the harvest, and in the time of the harvest I will say to the harvesters: First collect the weeds and bind them into bundles in order to burn them up; but gather together the wheat into my barn.’”
13:31 He put before them another parable, saying: “The kingdom of the heavens is like a grain of mustard, which a man, having taken, sowed in his field,
13:32 which indeed is smallest of all the seeds, but when it may be grown, it is greater than the garden plants and becomes a tree, so as for the birds of the sky to come and to lodge in its branches.”
13:33 He spoke to them another parable: “The kingdom of the heavens is like leaven that a woman, having taken, hid in three measures of flour, until all of it was leavened.”
13:34 All these things Jesus spoke in parables to the crowds, and without a parable He was not speaking to them,
13:35 so that it might be fulfilled, that having been spoken through the prophet, saying: “I will open My mouth in parables; I will utter things hidden from the foundation [of] the world.”
13:36 Then, having dismissed the crowds, He went into the house. And His disciples came to Him, saying, “Explain to us the parable of the weeds of the field.”
13:37 And answering, He said, “The One sowing the good seed is the Son of Man;
13:38 and the field is the world; and the good seed, these are the sons of the kingdom; and the weeds are the sons of the evil one;
13:39 and the enemy having sown them is the devil; and the harvest is the consummation of the age; and the harvesters are angels.
13:40 Therefore, as the weeds are gathered together and are burned up in fire, so will it be in the consummation of the age.
13:41 The Son of Man will send forth His angels, and they will gather out of His kingdom all the stumbling blocks and those doing lawlessness,
13:42 and they will cast them into the furnace of the fire—there will be weeping and gnashing of the teeth.
13:43 Then the righteous will shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. The one having ears, let him hear.
13:44 The kingdom of the heavens is like treasure hidden in the field, which a man, having found, hid. And from his joy, he goes and he sells all that he has, and he buys that field.
13:45 Again, the kingdom of the heavens is like a man, a merchant, seeking fine pearls.
13:46 And having found one very precious pearl, having gone away, he has sold all things, as many as he had, and bought it.
13:47 Again, the kingdom of the heavens is like a dragnet having been cast into the sea and having gathered together of every kind,
13:48 which, when it was filled, having drawn [it] up on the shore and having sat down, they collected the good into vessels, and they cast out the bad.
13:49 So will it be in the consummation of the age: The angels will go out and will separate the evil from the midst of the righteous
13:50 and will cast them into the furnace of the fire—there will be weeping and gnashing of the teeth.
13:51 Did you⁺ understand all these things?” They say to Him, “Yes.”
13:52 And He said to them, “Because of this, every scribe having been discipled in the kingdom of the heavens is like a man, a master of a house, who puts forth out of his treasure new and old.”
13:53 And it came to pass, when Jesus finished these parables, [that] He withdrew from there.
13:54 And having come into His hometown, He was teaching them in their synagogue, so that they are astonished and are saying, “From where unto this One [is] this wisdom and the miracles?”
13:55 Is this not the son of the carpenter? [Is] not His mother called Mary, and His brothers James and Joseph and Simon and Judas?
13:56 And are not all His sisters with us? Then from where [are] unto this One all these things?”
13:57 And they were taking offense at Him. But Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor, except in [his] hometown and in his house.”
13:58 And He did not do many miracles there, because of their unbelief.
14:1 At that time Herod the tetrarch heard the news of Jesus,
14:2 and he said to his servants, “This is John the Baptist; he was raised from the dead! And because of this, the miraculous powers are working in him.”
14:3 For Herod, having seized John, bound him and put [him] in prison because of Herodias, the wife of Philip his brother.
14:4 For John was saying to him, “It is not lawful for you to have her.”
14:5 And wanting to kill him, he feared the crowd, because they were holding him as a prophet.
14:6 But the birthday of Herod having come, the daughter of Herodias danced in the midst and pleased Herod,
14:7 whereupon he promised with an oath to give to her whatever she might ask.
14:8 And having been urged on by her mother, she says, “Give to me here upon a platter the head of John the Baptist.”
14:9 And the king, having been made sorrowful because of the oaths and those reclining with [him], commanded [it] to be given.
14:10 And having sent, he beheaded John in the prison.
14:11 And his head was brought on a platter and was given to the girl, and she brought [it] to her mother.
14:12 And having come, his disciples took up the body and buried it. And having come, they reported [it] to Jesus.
14:13 And having heard, Jesus withdrew from there in a boat to a wilderness place by Himself. And having heard, the crowds followed Him on foot from the cities.
14:14 And having gone out, He saw a great crowd and was moved with compassion toward them, and He healed their sick.
14:15 And evening having come, the disciples came to Him, saying, “This place is desolate, and the time already is gone by. Therefore dismiss the crowds so that, having gone to the villages, they might buy food for themselves.”
14:16 But Jesus said to them, “They have no need to go away. You⁺ give them [something] to eat.”
14:17 And they say to Him, “We have nothing here except five loaves and two fish.”
14:18 And He said, “Bring them here to Me.”
14:19 And having commanded the crowds to sit down on the grass, having taken the five loaves and the two fish, having looked up to the heaven, He blessed. And having broken, He gave the loaves to the disciples, and the disciples to the crowds.
14:20 And all ate and were satisfied, and they took up the superabounding of the fragments, twelve hand-baskets full.
14:21 And those eating were about five thousand men, apart from women and children.
14:22 And immediately He compelled the disciples to enter into the boat and to go before Him to the other side, until He might dismiss the crowds.
14:23 And having dismissed the crowds, He went up on the mountain by Himself to pray. And evening having come, He was there alone,
14:24 and the boat, being now many stadia from the land, is distressed by the waves, for the wind was contrary.
14:25 And in the fourth watch of the night He went to them, walking on the sea.
14:26 And the disciples, having seen Him walking on the sea, were troubled, saying, “It is a ghost!” And they cried out in fear.
14:27 But immediately Jesus spoke to them, saying, “Take courage! I am [He]! Do not” be afraid.
14:28 And answering Him, Peter said, “Lord, if You are [He], command me to come to You on the waters.”
14:29 And He said, “Come.” And having gone down from the boat, Peter walked on the waters and came to Jesus.
14:30 And seeing the strong wind, he was afraid, and having begun to sink, he cried out, saying, “Lord, save me!”
14:31 And immediately Jesus, having stretched out the hand, took hold of him and says to him, “O little of faith, why did you waver?”
14:32 And they having gone up into the boat, the wind abated.
14:33 And those in the boat worshiped Him, saying, “Truly You are God's Son!”
14:34 And having crossed over, they came to the land of Gennesaret.
14:35 And having recognized Him, the men of that place sent to all that surrounding region, and they brought to Him all those being ill,
14:36 and they were imploring Him that they might only touch the fringe of His garment. And as many as touched were saved.
15:1 Then Pharisees and scribes come to Jesus from Jerusalem, saying,
15:2 “Why do Your disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? For they do not wash their hands when they shall eat bread.”
15:3 And answering, He said to them, “Why also do you⁺ transgress the commandment of God because of your⁺ tradition?
15:4 For God said, ‘Honor [your] father and mother’ and ‘The one speaking evil of father or mother, in death let him end.’
15:5 But you⁺ say, ‘Whoever might say to father or mother: Whatever you might be profited by me [is] a gift,’
15:6 he shall not honor his father or his mother. And you⁺ made void the word of God because of your⁺ tradition.
15:7 Hypocrites! Isaiah prophesied correctly about you⁺, saying:
15:8 ‘This people honors Me with the lips, but their heart is kept far away from Me;
15:9 and in vain they worship Me, teaching [as] teachings the precepts of men.’”
15:10 And having summoned the crowd, He said to them, “Hear and understand.
15:11 Not what is entering into the mouth defiles the man; but what is proceeding out of the mouth, this defiles the man.”
15:12 Then the disciples, having come, said to Him, “Do You know that the Pharisees, having heard the saying, were offended?”
15:13 And answering, He said, “Every plant that My heavenly Father did not plant will be uprooted.
15:14 Leave them! They are blind guides of the blind. And if the blind may guide the blind, both will fall into a pit.”
15:15 And answering, Peter said to Him, “Explain to us this parable.”
15:16 And He said, “Are you⁺ also still without understanding?
15:17 Do you⁺ not perceive that everything entering into the mouth goes into the belly and is cast out into the sewer?
15:18 But the things proceeding out of the mouth come forth out of the heart, and these defile the man.
15:19 For out of the heart come forth evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, sexual immorality, thefts, false testimonies, slanders.
15:20 These are the things defiling the man, but to eat with unwashed hands does not defile the man.”
15:21 And having gone out from there, Jesus withdrew to the parts of Tyre and Sidon.
15:22 And behold, a Canaanite woman from those borders, having come out, was crying out, saying, “Have mercy on me, Lord, Son of David! My daughter is miserably possessed by a demon.”
15:23 But He did not answer her a word. And having come, His disciples were imploring Him, saying, “Dismiss her, because she cries out after us.”
15:24 And answering, He said, “I was not sent, except to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.”
15:25 And having come, she was worshiping Him, saying, “Lord, help me!”
15:26 And answering, He said, “It is not good to take the bread of the children and to cast [it] to the dogs.”
15:27 And she said, “Yes, Lord, for even the dogs eat from the crumbs falling from the table of their masters.”
15:28 “Then answering, Jesus said to her, “O woman, great [is] your faith! Let it be to you as you desire.” And her daughter was healed from that hour.
15:29 And having departed from there, Jesus went along the Sea of Galilee. And having gone up on the mountain, He was sitting there.
15:30 And many crowds came to Him, having with them the lame, the crippled, the blind, the mute, and many others. And they cast them at His feet, and He healed them,
15:31 so that the crowd marveled, seeing the mute speaking, the crippled restored, and the lame walking, and the blind seeing. And they glorified the God of Israel.
15:32 And Jesus, having summoned His disciples, said, “I have compassion toward the crowd, because already three days they continue with Me, and they have nothing that they might eat. And I do not want to dismiss them hungry, lest they faint on the way.”
15:33 And the disciples say to Him, “From where unto us in a secluded place [are] so many loaves so as to satisfy so great a crowd?”
15:34 And Jesus says to them, “How many loaves do you⁺ have?” And they said, “Seven, and a few small fish.”
15:35 And having commanded the crowd to sit down on the ground,
15:36 He took the seven loaves and the fish, and having given thanks, He broke [them] and was giving [them] to the disciples, and the disciples to the crowds.
15:37 And they all ate and were satisfied, and they took up the superabounding of the fragments, seven baskets full.
15:38 And those eating were four thousand men, apart from women and children.
15:39 And having dismissed the crowds, He entered into the boat and went to the borders of Magadan.
16:1 And having come, the Pharisees and Sadducees, testing [Him], asked Him to show them a sign out of heaven.
16:2 And answering, He said to them, “Evening having come, you⁺ say, ‘Fair weather, for the sky is red,’
16:3 and in the morning, ‘Today a storm, for the sky is red, being overcast.’ Indeed, you⁺ know to discern the face of the sky, but the signs of the times you⁺ are not able.
16:4 [An] evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and a sign will not be given to it except the sign of Jonah.” And having left them, He went away.
16:5 And the disciples, having come to the other side, forgot to take loaves.
16:6 And Jesus said to them, “Watch out and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”
16:7 And they were reasoning among themselves, saying, “Because we took no loaves.”
16:8 But having known [this], Jesus said, “Why do you⁺ reason among yourselves, O little of faith, that you⁺ have no loaves?
16:9 Do you⁺ not yet perceive? Nor do you⁺ remember the five loaves for the five thousand and how many hand-baskets you⁺ took up,
16:10 nor the seven loaves for the four thousand and how many baskets you⁺ took up?
16:11 How do you⁺ not perceive that I did not speak to you⁺ about loaves? But beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”
16:12 Then they understood that He did not say to beware of the leaven of the loaves, but of the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
16:13 And Jesus, having come into the parts of Caesarea Philippi, was questioning His disciples, saying, “Who do men say the Son of Man is?”
16:14 And they said, “Some indeed, John the Baptist; and others, Elijah; and others, Jeremiah or one of the prophets.”
16:15 He says to them, “But you⁺, who do you⁺ say I am?”
16:16 And answering, Simon Peter said, “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.”
16:17 And answering, Jesus said to him, “Blessed are you, Simon Bar-Jonah! For flesh and blood did not reveal [it] to you, but My Father who [is] in the heavens.
16:18 And I also say to you that you are Peter, and on this rock I will build My church, and the gates of Hades will not prevail against it.
16:19 I will give to you the keys of the kingdom of the heavens. And whatever you might bind on the earth will be bound in the heavens, and whatever you might loose on the earth will be loosed in the heavens.”
16:20 Then He instructed the disciples that they should tell no one that He is the Christ.
16:21 From that time Jesus began to show to His disciples that it is necessary for Him to go away to Jerusalem, and to suffer many things from the elders and chief priests and scribes, and to be killed, and on the third day to be raised.
16:22 And having taken Him aside, Peter began to rebuke Him, saying, “Far be it from You, Lord! This never will be unto You!”
16:23 But having turned, He said to Peter, “Get behind Me, Satan! You are a stumbling block to Me. For you do not have in mind the things of God, but the things of men.”
16:24 Then Jesus said to His disciples, “If anyone wants to come after Me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow Me.
16:25 For whoever may want to save his life will lose it, but whoever may lose his life on account of Me will find it.
16:26 For what will it profit a man if he should gain the whole world, but lose his soul? Or what will a man give [as] an exchange for his soul?
16:27 For the Son of Man is about to come in the glory of His Father with His angels, and then He will repay each one according to his deeds.
16:28 Truly I say to you⁺ that there are some of those standing here who shall not taste of death until they shall see the Son of Man coming in His kingdom.”
17:1 And after six days, Jesus takes along Peter and James and John his brother, and He brings them up onto a high mountain by themselves.
17:2 And He was transfigured before them, and His face shone like the sun, and His garments became white as the light.
17:3 And behold, there appeared to them Moses and Elijah, talking with Him.
17:4 And answering, Peter said to Jesus, “Lord, it is good for us to be here. If You wish, I will make here three tabernacles—one for You, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah.”
17:5 [In] his still speaking, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them, and behold, a voice out of the cloud, saying, “This is My Son, the Beloved, in whom I am well pleased. Listen to Him!”
17:6 And having heard [it], the disciples fell upon their face, and they were exceedingly terrified.
17:7 And Jesus, having come near and having touched them, said, “Rise up, and do not be afraid.”
17:8 And having lifted up their eyes, they saw no one except Jesus Himself alone.
17:9 And [in] their coming down from the mountain, Jesus commanded them, saying, “Tell no one the vision until the Son of Man should be raised out from the dead.”
17:10 And the disciples questioned Him, saying, “Why then do the scribes say that it is necessary for Elijah to come first?”
17:11 And answering, He said, “Elijah indeed comes and will restore all things.
17:12 But I say to you⁺ that Elijah did already come, and they did not know him, but they did to him whatever they wanted. Thus also the Son of Man is about to suffer under them.”
17:13 Then the disciples understood that He spoke to them about John the Baptist.
17:14 And [on] their having come to the crowd, a man came to Him, kneeling down to Him
17:15 and saying, “Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is epileptic and suffers miserably; for often he falls into the fire, and often into the water.
17:16 And I brought him to Your disciples, and they were not able to heal him.”
17:17 And answering, Jesus said, “O unbelieving and perverse generation, until when will I be with you⁺? Until when will I bear with you⁺? Bring him here to Me.”
17:18 And Jesus rebuked him, and the demon came out from him, and the boy was healed from that hour.
17:19 Then the disciples, having come to Jesus in private, said, “Why were we not able to cast it out?”
17:20 And He said to them, “Because of your⁺ little faith. For truly I say to you⁺, if you⁺ have faith as a grain of mustard, you⁺ will say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move. And nothing will be impossible for you⁺.”
17:22 And [in] their gathering together in Galilee, Jesus said to them, “The Son of Man is about to be betrayed into the hands of men,
17:23 and they will kill Him, and on the third day He will be raised up.” And they were deeply grieved.
17:24 And [on] their having come to Capernaum, those receiving the didrachmas came to Peter and said, “Does your⁺ Teacher pay the didrachmas?”
17:25 He says, “Yes.” And [on] his having come into the house, Jesus anticipated him, saying, “What do you think, Simon? From whom do the kings of the earth receive custom or tribute: From their sons, or from the strangers?”
17:26 And [on] his having said, “From the strangers,” Jesus said to him, “Then the sons are free.
17:27 But so that we might not offend them, having gone to the sea, cast a hook, and take the first fish having come up. And having opened its mouth, you will find a stater. Having taken that, give [it] to them for Me and you.”
18:1 In that hour the disciples came to Jesus, saying, “Who then is greater in the kingdom of the heavens?”
18:2 And having summoned a little child, He set him in their midst
18:3 and said, “Truly I say to you⁺, if you⁺ shall not be turned and become as the little children, you⁺ shall never enter into the kingdom of the heavens.
18:4 Therefore whoever will humble himself like this little child, he is the greatest in the kingdom of the heavens.
18:5 And whoever shall receive one such little child in My name, he receives Me.
18:6 And whoever might cause to stumble one of these little ones believing in Me, it is better for him that a heavy millstone should be hung around his neck and he should be sunk in the depth of the sea.
18:7 Woe to the world because of the stumbling blocks. For [it is] a necessity that the stumbling blocks come, but woe to the man through whom the stumbling block comes!
18:8 Now if your hand or your foot causes you to stumble, cut it off and cast [it] from you; it is better for you to enter into life crippled or lame than, having two hands or two feet, to be cast into the eternal fire.
18:9 And if your eye causes you to stumble, pluck it out and cast [it] from you. It is better for you to enter into life one-eyed than, having two eyes, to be cast into the Gehenna of fire.
18:10 See that you⁺ do not despise one of these little ones. For I say to you⁺ that their angels in the heavens always see the face of My Father who [is] in the heavens.
18:12 What do you⁺ think? If unto any man there should be a hundred sheep, and one of them should go astray, will he not leave the ninety-nine on the mountains and, having gone, seek the one going astray?
18:13 And if it should come to pass [that] he finds it, truly I say to you⁺ that he rejoices over it more than over the ninety-nine not having gone astray.
18:14 Thus it is not the will of your⁺ Father who [is] in the heavens that one of these little ones should be lost.
18:15 And if your brother may sin against you, go reprove him between you and him alone. If he may hear you, you have gained your brother.
18:16 But if he may not hear, take with you one or two more, so that ‘every word may be stood upon the testimony of two or three witnesses.’
18:17 And if he may fail to hear them, say [it] to the church. And if he may fail to hear even the church, let him be unto you as the Gentile and the tax collector.
18:18 Truly I say to you⁺, whatever you⁺ shall bind on the earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you⁺ shall loose on the earth will be loosed in heaven.
18:19 Again, truly I say to you⁺ that if two of you⁺ on the earth shall agree about any matter that they shall ask, it will be done for them by My Father who [is] in the heavens.
18:20 For where two or three are gathered together unto My name, there am I in their midst.”
18:21 Then, having come, Peter said to Him, “Lord, how often will my brother sin against me, and I will forgive him? Up to seven times?”
18:22 Jesus says to him, “I do not say to you, up to seven times, but up to seventy-seven times!
18:23 Because of this, the kingdom of the heavens was likened to to a man, a king, who wanted to settle accounts with his servants.
18:24 And [on] his having begun to settle, one was brought to him, a debtor of ten thousand talents.
18:25 And [on] his having nothing to repay, the master commanded him to be sold—and the wife and the children and all of whatever he had—and repayment to be made.
18:26 Therefore the servant, having fallen down, was bowing on his knees to him, saying, ‘Have patience with me, and I will repay all to you.’
18:27 And having been moved with compassion, the master of that servant released him and forgave him the debt.
18:28 But having gone out, that servant found one of his fellow servants who was owing him a hundred denarii. And having seized him, he was choking [him], saying, ‘Repay what you owe!’
18:29 Therefore, having fallen down, his fellow servant was calling on him, saying, ‘Have patience with me, and I will repay you.’
18:30 But he was not willing. Rather, having gone, he cast him into prison until he should repay what was owed.
18:31 Therefore his fellow servants, having seen the things having happened, were deeply grieved, and having gone, they made clear to their master all the things having happened.
18:32 Then, having summoned him, his master says to him, ‘Evil servant! I forgave you all that debt because you called on me.
18:33 Was it not necessary for you also to have had mercy on your fellow servant, as I also had mercy on you?’
18:34 And having become angry, his master delivered him to the tormenters until he should repay everything being owed to him.
18:35 Thus also My heavenly Father will do to you⁺ unless each of you⁺ should forgive his brother from your⁺ hearts.”
19:1 And it came to pass when Jesus finished these words [that] He withdrew from Galilee and came into the borders of Judea beyond the Jordan.
19:2 And many crowds followed Him, and He healed them there.
19:3 And Pharisees came to Him, testing Him and saying, “Is it lawful for a man to send away his wife for any cause?”
19:4 And answering, He said, “Did you⁺ not read that the One having created from the beginning ‘made them male and female,’
19:5 and He said, ‘On account of this a man will leave the father and the mother and be joined with his wife, and the two will be for one flesh’?
19:6 So they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore what God yoked together, let man not separate.”
19:7 They say to Him, “Why then did Moses command to give [her] a roll of divorce and to send her away?”
19:8 He says to them, “Moses, for your⁺ hardness of heart, allowed you⁺ to divorce your⁺ wives; but it has not been this way from the beginning.
19:9 And I say to you⁺ that whoever shall send away his wife, except for sexual immorality, and shall marry another, he commits adultery.”
19:10 His disciples say to Him, “If this is the case of the man with the wife, it is better not to marry.”
19:11 And He said to them, “Not all receive this word, but [those] to whom it has been given.
19:12 For there are eunuchs who were born thus from the womb of [their] mother, and there are eunuchs who were made eunuchs by men, and there are eunuchs who made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of the heavens. The one being able to receive [it], let him receive [it].”
19:13 Then little children were brought to Him so that He might lay the hands on them and He might pray, but the disciples rebuked them.
19:14 But Jesus said, “Permit the little children, and do not forbid them to come to Me! For unto such is the kingdom of the heavens.”
19:15 And having laid the hands on them, He went from there.
19:16 And behold, one having come to Him said, “Teacher, what good shall I do so that I shall have eternal life?”
19:17 And He said to him, “Why do you ask Me about the good? One is good. But if you want to enter into life, keep the commandments.”
19:18 He says to Him, “Which?” And Jesus said, “‘You will not murder, you will not commit adultery, you will not steal, you will not bear false witness,
19:19 honor the father and the mother, and you will love your neighbor as yourself.’”
19:20 The young man says to Him, “All these I kept. What do I still lack?”
19:21 Jesus was saying to him, “If you want to be perfect, go, sell what you are possessing and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in the heavens. And come, follow Me.”
19:22 And having heard this word, the young man went away grieving, for he was one having many possessions.
19:23 And Jesus said to His disciples, “Truly I say to you⁺ that with difficulty a rich man will enter into the kingdom of the heavens.
19:24 And again I say to you⁺, [it] is easier for a camel to enter through the eye of a needle than [for] a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.”
19:25 And having heard, the disciples were exceedingly astonished, saying, “Who then is able to be saved?”
19:26 And having looked on [them], Jesus said to them, “With men this is impossible, but with God all things [are] possible.”
19:27 Then answering, Peter said to Him, “Behold, we have left all and followed You. What then will be unto us?”
19:28 And Jesus said to them, “Truly I say to you⁺ that you⁺, the ones having followed Me, in the regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit down upon His throne of glory, you⁺ also will sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
19:29 And everyone who has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or wife or children or fields for the sake of My name will receive a hundredfold and will inherit eternal life.
19:30 But many [who are] first will be last, and last, first.[]
20:1 “For the kingdom of the heavens is like a man, a master of a house, who went out in the morning to hire workmen for his vineyard.
20:2 And having agreed with the workmen for a denarius a day, he sent them into his vineyard.
20:3 And having gone out about the third hour, he saw others standing in the marketplace idle.
20:4 And to those ones he said, ‘You⁺ also go into the vineyard, and I will give you⁺ whatever may be right.’
20:5 And they went away. And having gone out again about the sixth and ninth hour, he did likewise.
20:6 And about the eleventh, having gone out, he found others standing, and he says to them, ‘Why do you⁺ stand here all the day idle?’
20:7 They say to him, ‘Because no one hired us.’ He says to them, ‘You⁺ also go into the vineyard.’
20:8 And evening having come, the master of the vineyard says to his foreman, ‘Call the workmen and pay them the wages, having begun from the last, up to the first.’
20:9 And having come, the ones of about the eleventh hour each received a denarius.
20:10 And having come, the first thought that they will receive more. But they themselves also received each a denarius.
20:11 And having received [it], they were grumbling against the master of the house,
20:12 saying, ‘These, the last, worked one hour, and you made them equal to us, the ones having borne the burden of the day and the scorching heat.’
20:13 And answering one of them, he said, ‘Friend, I am doing you no wrong. Did you not agree with me on a denarius?
20:14 Take what [is] yours and go. But I want to give to this last one as to you also.
20:15 Or is it not lawful for me to do what I want with what [is] mine? Or is your eye evil because I am good?’
20:16 Thus the last will be first, and the first, last.”
20:17 And Jesus, going up to Jerusalem, took aside the twelve disciples by themselves, and on the way He said to them,
20:18 “Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be betrayed to the chief priests and scribes, and they will condemn Him to death.
20:19 And they will betray Him to the Gentiles to mock and to flog and to crucify, and on the third day He will be raised up.”
20:20 Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee came to Him with her sons, kneeling down and asking something from Him.
20:21 And He said to her, “What do you want?” She says to Him, “Say that these two sons of mine shall sit, one at Your right hand and one at Your left hand, in Your kingdom.”
20:22 And answering, Jesus said, “You⁺ do not know what you⁺ are asking. Are you⁺ able to drink the cup that I am about to drink?” They say to Him, “We are able.”
20:23 He says to them, “Indeed you⁺ will drink My cup, but to sit at My right hand and at [My] left, this is not Mine to give, but [to] [those] for whom it has been prepared by My Father.”
20:24 And having heard, the ten were indignant about the two brothers.
20:25 But Jesus, having summoned them, said, “You⁺ know that the rulers of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them, and the great ones exercise authority over them.
20:26 It will not be this way among you⁺. But whoever may want to become great among you⁺, he will be your⁺ servant;
20:27 and whoever may want to be first among you⁺, he will be your⁺ slave—
20:28 even as the Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give His life [as] a ransom for many.”
20:29 And [in] their going out from Jericho, a great crowd followed Him.
20:30 And behold, two blind [men] sitting beside the road, having heard that Jesus is passing by, cried out, saying, “Lord, have mercy on us, Son of David!”
20:31 And the crowd rebuked them, that they should be silent. But they cried out all the more, saying, “Lord, have mercy on us, Son of David!”
20:32 And having stood, Jesus called them and said, “What do you⁺ want [that] I may do for you⁺?”
20:33 They say to Him, “Lord, that our eyes may be opened.”
20:34 And having been moved with compassion, Jesus touched their eyes, and immediately they received their sight, and they followed Him.
21:1 And when they drew near to Jerusalem and came to Bethphage on the Mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples,
21:2 saying to them, “Go into the village ahead of you⁺, and immediately you⁺ will find a donkey tied, and a colt with her. Having loosed [them], bring [them] to Me.
21:3 And if anyone should say anything to you⁺, you⁺ will say that the Lord has need of them, and immediately he will send them.”
21:4 And this came to pass so that it might be fulfilled, that having been spoken through the prophet, saying,
21:5 “Say to the daughter of Zion, ‘Behold, your King comes to you, gentle and mounted on a donkey, and on a colt, the foal of a beast of burden.’”
21:6 And the disciples, having gone and having done as Jesus directed them,
21:7 led the donkey and the colt and put their garments on them, and He sat on them.
21:8 And the very large crowd spread their garments in the road, and others were cutting branches from the trees and were spreading [them] in the road.
21:9 And the crowds going before Him and those following were crying out, saying: “Hosanna to the Son of David!” “Blessed is the One coming in the name of the Lord!” “Hosanna in the highest!”
21:10 And [on] His having entered into Jerusalem, all the city was shaken, saying, “Who is this?”
21:11 And the crowds were saying, “This is the prophet, Jesus, the One from Nazareth of Galilee.”
21:12 And Jesus entered into the temple and cast out all those selling and buying in the temple. And He overturned the tables of the money changers and the seats of those selling the doves.
21:13 And He says to them, “It has been written: ‘My house will be called a house of prayer.’ But you⁺ are making it ‘a den of robbers.’”
21:14 And the blind and the lame came to Him in the temple, and He healed them.
21:15 But the chief priests and the scribes, having seen the wonders that He did and the children crying out in the temple and saying, “Hosanna to the Son of David,” were indignant.
21:16 And they said to Him, “Do You hear what these say?” And Jesus says to them, “Yes. Did you⁺ never read: ‘Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings You prepared praise’?”
21:17 And having left them, He went out of the city to Bethany, and He lodged there.
21:18 And in the morning, having come back into the city, He was hungry.
21:19 And having seen one fig tree on the way, He went to it and found nothing on it except leaves. And He says to it, “Never let there be [anymore] fruit out of you, to the age!” And the fig tree withered immediately.
21:20 And having seen [it], the disciples marveled, saying, “How did the fig tree wither immediately?”
21:21 And answering, Jesus said to them, “Truly I say to you⁺, if you⁺ shall have faith and not doubt, you⁺ will do not only this of the fig tree, but even if you⁺ should say to this mountain, ‘Be taken away and be cast into the sea,’ it will come to pass.
21:22 And all things, as many as you⁺ might ask in prayer, believing, you⁺ will receive.”
21:23 And [on] His having come into the temple teaching, the chief priests and the elders of the people came to Him, saying, “By what authority do You do these things?” And who gave You this authority?
21:24 And answering, Jesus said to them, “I will also ask you⁺ one word, which if you⁺ tell Me, I will also tell you⁺ by what authority I do these things.
21:25 From where was the baptism of John? From heaven or from men?” And they were reasoning among themselves, saying, “If we should say, ‘From heaven,’ He will say to us, ‘Why then did you⁺ not believe him?’
21:26 But if we should say, ‘From men,’ we fear the crowd, for all hold John as a prophet.”
21:27 And answering Jesus, they said, “We do not know.” And He said to them, “Neither do I tell you⁺ by what authority I do these things.
21:28 But what do you⁺ think? A man had two sons, and having come to the first he said, ‘Son, go today, work in the vineyard.’
21:29 And answering, he said, ‘I will not.’ But afterward, having repented, he went.
21:30 And having come to the second, he said likewise. And answering, he said, ‘I [will] sir,’ and he did not go.
21:31 Which of the two did the will of the father?” They say, “The first.” Jesus says to them, “Truly I say to you⁺ that the tax collectors and the prostitutes go before you⁺ into the kingdom of God.
21:32 For John came to you⁺ in the way of righteousness, and you⁺ did not believe him, but the tax collectors and the prostitutes believed him. And you⁺, having seen, did not even repent afterward to believe him.
21:33 Hear another parable: There was a man, a master of a house, who planted a vineyard, and placed around it a fence, and dug a winepress in it, and built a tower. And he rented it out to farmers and traveled abroad.
21:34 And when the season of the fruits drew near, he sent his servants to the farmers to receive his fruits.
21:35 And the farmers, having taken his servants, one they beat, and one they killed, and one they stoned.
21:36 Again he sent other servants, more than the first, and they did likewise to them.
21:37 And afterward he sent his son to them, saying, ‘They will respect my son.’
21:38 But the farmers, having seen the son, said among themselves, ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him and gain possession of his inheritance.’
21:39 And having taken him, they cast [him] out of the vineyard and killed [him].
21:40 Therefore, when the lord of the vineyard shall come, what will he do to those farmers?”
21:41 They say to Him, “He will destroy those evil ones grievously, and he will give out the vineyard to other farmers who will give back to him the fruits in their seasons.”
21:42 Jesus says to them, “Did you⁺ never read in the Scriptures: ‘The stone that those building rejected, this became the head of the corner. This was from the Lord, and it is marvelous in our eyes’?
21:43 Because of this I say to you⁺ that the kingdom of God will be taken away from you⁺, and it will be given to a people producing its fruits.
21:44 And the one having fallen on this stone will be broken; but on whomever it might fall, it will grind him to powder.”
21:45 And the chief priests and the Pharisees, having heard His parables, knew that He speaks about them.
21:46 And seeking to lay hold of Him, they feared the crowds, because they were holding Him as a prophet.
22:1 And answering, Jesus again spoke to them in parables, saying:
22:2 “The kingdom of the heavens was likened to a man, a king, who made a wedding feast for his son.
22:3 And he sent his servants to call those having been called to the wedding feast, and they were not willing to come.
22:4 Again he sent other servants, saying, ‘Say to those having been called: Behold, I have prepared my dinner. My oxen and fatlings have been killed, and all things [are] ready; come to the wedding feast.’
22:5 And having disregarded [it], they went away, one to [his] own field, and one to his business.
22:6 And the rest, having laid hold of his servants, mistreated and killed [them].
22:7 And the king was enraged, and having sent his armies, he destroyed those murderers and set on fire their city.
22:8 Then he says to his servants, ‘Indeed, the wedding feast is ready, but those having been called were not worthy.
22:9 Therefore go on the thoroughfares of the roads and call to the wedding feast as many as you⁺ may find.’
22:10 And those servants, having gone out into the roads, gathered together all whom they found, both evil and good, and the wedding feast was filled with those reclining.
22:11 And the king, having entered to view those reclining, saw a man there not dressed in clothing of a wedding feast.
22:12 And he says to him, ‘Friend, how did you enter here not having clothing of a wedding feast?’ And he was speechless.
22:13 Then the king said to the servants, ‘Having bound his feet and hands, cast him out into the outer darkness—there will be weeping and gnashing of the teeth.’
22:14 For many are called, but few chosen.”
22:15 Then having gone, the Pharisees took counsel [as to] how they might trap Him in a word.
22:16 And they send to Him their disciples with the Herodians, saying, “Teacher, we know that You are true, and You teach the way of God in truth. And to You there is care about no one, for You do not look to the appearance of men.
22:17 Therefore tell us, what do You think? Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar or not?”
22:18 But having known their malice, Jesus said, “Why do you⁺ test Me, hypocrites?
22:19 Show Me the coin of the tribute.” And they presented to Him a denarius.
22:20 And He says to them, “Whose [is] this image, and the inscription?”
22:21 They say to Him, “Caesar’s.” Then He says to them, “Therefore give back the things of Caesar to Caesar, and the things of God to God.”
22:22 And having heard, they marveled. And having left Him, they went away.
22:23 On that day Sadducees, saying there is not a resurrection, came to Him, and they questioned Him,
22:24 saying, “Teacher, Moses said [that] if anyone should die not having children, his brother will marry his wife and will raise up seed for his brother.
22:25 Now there were seven brothers with us. And the first, having married, died; and not having seed, he left his wife to his brother.
22:26 Likewise also the second, and the third, to the seventh.
22:27 And last of all, the woman died.
22:28 In the resurrection, therefore, of which of the seven will she be wife? For all had her.”
22:29 And answering, Jesus said to them, “You⁺ go astray, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God.
22:30 For in the resurrection, they neither marry nor are they given in marriage, but they are like angels in heaven.
22:31 But concerning the resurrection of the dead, did you⁺ not read what has been spoken to you⁺ by God, saying,
22:32 ‘I am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob’? He is not the God of the dead, but of the living.”
22:33 And having heard, the crowds were astonished at His teaching.
22:34 And the Pharisees, having heard that He silenced the Sadducees, were gathered at the same [place].
22:35 And one of them, a lawyer, questioned, testing Him,
22:36 “Teacher, which [is] the great commandment in the Law?”
22:37 And He said to him, “‘You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind.’
22:38 This is the great and first commandment.
22:39 And the second [is] like it: ‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself.’
22:40 On these two commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets.”
22:41 And the Pharisees having been assembled together, Jesus questioned them,
22:42 saying, “What do you⁺ think about the Christ? Of whom is He son?” They say to Him, “Of David.”
22:43 He says to them, “How then does David in the Spirit call Him ‘Lord,’ saying:
22:44 ‘The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit at My right hand until I place Your enemies [as] a footstool for Your feet”’?
22:45 If, therefore, David calls Him ‘Lord,’ how is He his son?”
22:46 And no one was able to answer Him a word, nor did anyone dare from that day to question Him [any] longer.
23:1 Then Jesus spoke to the crowds and to His disciples,
23:2 saying, “The scribes and the Pharisees sat down on Moses’ seat.
23:3 Therefore do and observe all things, whatsoever they might tell you⁺. But do not do according to their works, for they speak and do not do.
23:4 And they tie up burdens heavy and hard to bear, and they lay [them] on the shoulders of men; but they themselves are not willing to move them with their finger.
23:5 And they do all their works in order to be seen by men. For they broaden their phylacteries and lengthen their tassels.
23:6 And they love the chief place at the suppers, and the first seats in the synagogues,
23:7 and the greetings in the marketplaces, and to be called ‘Rabbi’ by men.
23:8 But you⁺ shall not be called ‘Rabbi,’ for your⁺ Teacher is One, and you⁺ are all brothers.
23:9 And you⁺ shall call no one your⁺ father on the earth, for One is your⁺ Father who [is] in heaven.
23:10 Neither shall you⁺ be called instructors, because One is your⁺ Instructor, the Christ.
23:11 But the greatest among you⁺ will be your⁺ servant.
23:12 And whoever will exalt himself will be humbled, and whoever will humble himself will be exalted.
23:13 But woe to you⁺, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you⁺ shut up the kingdom of the heavens before men. For you⁺ do not enter, nor even do you⁺ allow those who are entering to enter.
23:15 Woe to you⁺, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you⁺ traverse the sea and the dry land to make one convert, and when he might become one, you⁺ make him twofold more a son of Gehenna than yourselves.
23:16 Woe to you⁺, blind guides, those saying, ‘Whoever shall swear by the temple, it is nothing; but whoever shall swear by the gold of the temple is bound by his oath.’
23:17 Foolish and blind ones! For which is greater: the gold, or the temple having sanctified the gold?
23:18 And [you say], ‘Whoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whoever shall swear by the gift that [is] upon it is bound by his oath.’
23:19 Blind ones! For which [is] greater: the gift, or the altar sanctifying the gift?
23:20 Therefore the one having sworn by the altar swears by it and by all things that [are] upon it.
23:21 And the one having sworn by the temple swears by it and by the One dwelling in it.
23:22 And the one having sworn by heaven swears by the throne of God and by the One sitting upon it.
23:23 Woe to you⁺, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you⁺ pay tithes of mint and dill and cumin, and you⁺ left aside the weightier [things] of the law: justice and mercy and faithfulness. And it was necessary to do these, and those not to leave aside.
23:24 Blind guides—those straining out the gnat and swallowing up the camel!
23:25 Woe to you⁺, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you⁺ cleanse the outside of the cup and of the dish, but inside they are full of plundering and self-indulgence.
23:26 Blind Pharisee! First cleanse the inside of the cup and of the dish, so that its outside might become clean also.
23:27 Woe to you⁺, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, because you⁺ are like whitewashed tombs, which indeed on the outside appear beautiful, but on the inside they are full of bones of the dead and of all uncleanness.
23:28 Thus also on the outside you⁺ indeed appear righteous to men, but on the inside you⁺ are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness.
23:29 Woe to you⁺, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you⁺ build the tombs of the prophets and adorn the monuments of the righteous.
23:30 And you⁺ say, ‘If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.’
23:31 Thus you⁺ bear witness to yourselves that you⁺ are sons of those having murdered the prophets.
23:32 And you⁺, fill up the measure of your⁺ fathers.
23:33 Serpents! Offspring of vipers! How shall you⁺ escape from the judgment of Gehenna?
23:34 Because of this, behold, I send to you⁺ prophets and wise [men] and scribes. Some of them you⁺ will kill and crucify, and some of them you⁺ will flog in your⁺ synagogues and will persecute from city to city,
23:35 so that upon you⁺ shall come all the righteous blood being poured out upon the earth, from the blood of the righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah son of Berechiah, whom you⁺ murdered between the temple and the altar.
23:36 Truly I say to you⁺, all these things will come upon this generation.
23:37 O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, killing the prophets and stoning those sent to her! How often I willed to gather together your children, the way that a hen gathers together her chicks under the wings, and you⁺ were not willing!
23:38 Behold, your⁺ house is left to you⁺ desolate!
23:39 For I say to you⁺, you⁺ shall not see Me from now until you⁺ say, ‘Blessed [is] the One coming in the name of the Lord.’”
24:1 And having gone out from the temple, Jesus was going, and His disciples came near to point out to Him the buildings of the temple.
24:2 And answering, He said to them, “Do you⁺ not see all these things? Truly I say to you⁺, not one stone here shall be left upon a stone, which will not be thrown down.”
24:3 And He sitting upon the Mount of Olives, the disciples came to Him by Himself, saying, “Tell us when these things will be. And what [is] the sign of Your coming and the consummation of the age?”
24:4 And answering, Jesus said to them, “Take heed, lest anyone may lead you⁺ astray.
24:5 For many will come in My name, saying, ‘I am the Christ,’ and they will lead many astray.
24:6 And you⁺ will begin to hear of wars and rumors of wars. Behold, do not be alarmed; for it is necessary to happen, but the end is not yet.
24:7 For nation will rise up against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be famines and earthquakes in various places.
24:8 And all these [are] the beginning of birth pains.
24:9 Then they will deliver you⁺ up to tribulation, and they will kill you⁺, and you⁺ will be hated by all the nations because of My name.
24:10 And then many will be caused to stumble, and they will deliver up one another and will hate one another;
24:11 and many false prophets will arise and will lead many astray.
24:12 And because lawlessness is to be multiplied, the love of many will grow cold.
24:13 But the one having endured to the end, he will be saved.
24:14 And this gospel of the kingdom will be proclaimed in the whole world for a testimony to all the nations, and then the end will come.
24:15 Therefore, when you⁺ shall see the ‘abomination of the desolation,’ having been spoken of by the prophet Daniel, standing in the holy place (the one reading, let him understand),
24:16 then those in Judea, let them flee to the mountains;
24:17 the one on the housetop, let him not come down to take away the [things] out of his house;
24:18 and the one in the field, let him not return back to take away his garment.
24:19 And woe to those having in womb and to those nursing in those days!
24:20 But pray that your⁺ flight may not be in winter, nor on a Sabbath.
24:21 For then there will be great tribulation, such as has not been from the beginning of the world until now, nor ever shall be.
24:22 And if those days were not shortened, not any flesh would have been saved; but because of the chosen, those days will be shortened.
24:23 At that time if anyone should say to you⁺, ‘Behold, here [is] the Christ,’ or ‘Here,’ do not believe [it].
24:24 For false Christs and false prophets will arise and will give great signs and wonders so as to lead astray, if possible, even the chosen.
24:25 Behold, I have told you⁺ beforehand.
24:26 Therefore if they may say to you⁺, ‘Behold, He is in the wilderness,’ do not go out; [or] ‘Behold, in the inner rooms,’ do not believe [it].
24:27 For just as the lightning goes out from the east and shines as far as the west, so will be the coming of the Son of Man.
24:28 Wherever the carcass may be, there the vultures will be gathered.
24:29 And immediately after the tribulation of those days: ‘The sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give her light; and the stars will fall from the sky, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken.”’
24:30 And then the sign of the Son of Man will appear in heaven, and then all the tribes of the earth will mourn. And they will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory.
24:31 And He will send His angels with a great trumpet call, and they will gather together His chosen from the four winds, from the ends of the heavens to the ends of them.
24:32 Now learn the parable from the fig tree: When its branch already shall have become tender and it may put forth leaves, you⁺ know that the summer [is] near.
24:33 So also you⁺, when you⁺ see all these things, know that He is near, at the doors.
24:34 Truly I say to you⁺ that this generation shall not have passed away until all these things shall have come to pass.
24:35 The heaven and the earth will pass away, but My words shall never pass away.
24:36 But concerning that day and hour no one knows, not even the angels of the heavens, nor the Son, except the Father only.
24:37 For as [were] the days of Noah, so will be the coming of the Son of Man.
24:38 For as in those days before the flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until that day Noah entered into the ark.
24:39 And they did not know until the flood came and took away all. So also will be the coming of the Son of Man.
24:40 Then two will be in the field: one is taken, and one is left.
24:41 Two [women] will be grinding at the mill: one is taken, and one is left.
24:42 Therefore watch, because you⁺ do not know on what day your⁺ Lord comes.
24:43 But know this, that if the master of the house had known in which watch the thief comes, he would have watched and would not have allowed his house to be broken into.
24:44 Because of this also, you⁺ be ready, because in the hour that you⁺ do not think, the Son of Man comes.
24:45 Who then is the faithful and wise servant, whom the master set over his household, to give them the food in season?
24:46 Blessed [is] that servant whom his master, having come, will find so doing.
24:47 Truly I say to you⁺ that he will set him over all of his possessions.
24:48 But if that evil servant should say in his heart, ‘My master delays,’
24:49 and he should begin to beat his fellow servants, and he should eat and drink with those being drunk,
24:50 the master of that servant will come in a day that he does not expect and in an hour that he does not know,
24:51 and he will cut him in two and will appoint his portion with the hypocrites—there will be weeping and gnashing of the teeth.[]
25:1 [“] Then the kingdom of the heavens will be likened to ten virgins, who, having taken their lamps, went out to meet the bridegroom,
25:2 and five of them were foolish, and five wise.
25:3 For the foolish, having taken their lamps, did not take oil with them;
25:4 but the wise took oil in the vessels with their lamps.
25:5 And [in] the tarrying of the bridegroom, they all became drowsy and were sleeping.
25:6 And in the middle of the night there was a cry: ‘Behold, the bridegroom! Come out to meet him!’
25:7 Then all those virgins arose and trimmed their lamps.
25:8 And the foolish said to the wise, ‘Give us some of your⁺ oil, because our lamps are going out.’
25:9 And the wise answered, saying, ‘No, lest it might not be sufficient for us and you⁺. Go rather to those selling, and buy for yourselves.’
25:10 And [in] their going away to buy, the bridegroom came, and those ready went in with him to the wedding feast, and the door was shut.
25:11 And afterward, the other virgins come also, saying, ‘Lord, lord, open to us!’
25:12 And answering, he said, ‘Truly I say to you⁺, I have not known you⁺.’
25:13 Therefore watch, for you⁺ do not know the day nor the hour.
25:14 For [it is] like a man going on a journey [who] called his own servants and delivered his possessions to them.
25:15 And indeed, to one he gave five talents; and to one, two; and to one, one—to each according to his own ability. And he left the region.
25:16 Immediately the one having received the five talents, having gone, traded with them and gained five others.
25:17 Likewise, the one with the two gained two others.
25:18 But the one having received the one, having gone away, dug in the earth and hid his master's money.
25:19 And after much time, the master of those servants comes and settles the account with them.
25:20 And the one having received the five talents, having come, brought to [him] five other talents, saying, ‘Master, you delivered to me five talents. Behold, I gained five other talents.’
25:21 His master said to him, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant! You were faithful over a few things; I will set you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master!’
25:22 And the one with the two talents, also having come, said, ‘Lord, you delivered to me two talents. Behold, I gained two other talents.’
25:23 His master said to him, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant! You were faithful over a few things; I will set you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master!’
25:24 And the one having received the one talent, having come, also said, ‘Lord, I knew you, that you are a hard man, reaping where you did not sow, and gathering from where you did not scatter.
25:25 And having been afraid, having gone away, I hid your talent in the ground. Behold, you have what [is] yours.’
25:26 And answering, his master said to him, ‘Wicked and slothful servant! You knew that I reap where I did not sow and gather from where I did not scatter.
25:27 Therefore it was necessary for you to cast my money to the bankers, and having come, I would have received my own with interest.
25:28 Therefore take away the talent from him and give [it] to the one having the ten talents.
25:29 For everyone having will be given, and he will have in abundance. But the one not having, even that which he has will be taken away from him.
25:30 And cast out the worthless servant into the outer darkness—there will be weeping and gnashing of the teeth.’
25:31 And when the Son of Man comes in His glory, and all the angels with Him, then He will sit upon the throne of His glory.
25:32 And all the nations will be gathered before Him, and He will separate them from one another, as the shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
25:33 And indeed, He will set the sheep on His right hand and the goats on [His] left.
25:34 Then the King will say to those on His right hand, ‘Come, the blessed of My Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you⁺ from the foundation of the world.
25:35 For I hungered, and you⁺ gave Me [something] to eat; I thirsted, and you⁺ gave Me [something] to drink; I was a stranger, and you⁺ took Me in;
25:36 [I was] naked, and you⁺ clothed Me; I was ailing, and you⁺ visited Me; I was in prison, and you⁺ came to Me.’
25:37 Then the righteous will answer Him, saying, ‘Lord, when did we see You hungering, and fed [You]? Or thirsting, and gave [You] to drink?
25:38 And when did we see You a stranger, and took [You] in? Or naked, and clothed [You]?
25:39 And when did we see You ailing or in prison, and came to You?’
25:40 And answering, the King will say to them, ‘Truly I say to you⁺, inasmuch as you⁺ did [it] to one of the least of these brothers of Mine, you⁺ did [it] to Me.’
25:41 Then also He will say to those on [His] left, ‘Depart from Me, the cursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels.
25:42 For I hungered, and you⁺ did not give to Me to eat; and I thirsted, and you⁺ did not give Me to drink;
25:43 I was a stranger, and you⁺ did not take Me in; naked, and you⁺ did not clothe Me; ailing and in prison, and you⁺ did not visit Me.’
25:44 Then they also will answer, saying, ‘Lord, when did we see You hungering, or thirsting, or a stranger, or naked, or ailing, or in prison, and we did not minister to You?’
25:45 Then He will answer them, saying, ‘Truly I say to you⁺, inasmuch as you⁺ did not do [it] to one of the least of these, you⁺ did not do [it] to Me.’
25:46 And these will go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life.”
26:1 And it came to pass, when Jesus finished all these words, [that] He said to His disciples,
26:2 “You⁺ know that after two days the Passover takes place, and the Son of Man is delivered over to be crucified.”
26:3 Then the chief priests were gathered together—and the elders of the people—in the courtyard of the high priest, who is called Caiaphas,
26:4 and they plotted together in order that they might seize Jesus by guile and kill [Him].
26:5 But they were saying, “Not during the feast, lest a riot might take place among the people.”
26:6 And Jesus having been in Bethany in the house of Simon the Leper,
26:7 a woman came to Him, having an alabaster flask of very costly fragrant oil, and she poured [it] on His head [as] He is reclining.
26:8 And the disciples, having seen, became indignant, saying, “For what [is] this waste?
26:9 For this could have been sold for much and given to the poor.”
26:10 And Jesus, having known, said to them, “Why do you⁺ cause trouble to the woman? For she did a beautiful work to Me.
26:11 For the poor you⁺ always have with you, but not always do you⁺ have Me.
26:12 For she, in pouring this fragrant oil on My body, did [it] for My burial.
26:13 Truly I say to you⁺, wherever this gospel shall be proclaimed in the whole world, that which she did will also be spoken of, for a memorial of her.”
26:14 Then one of the Twelve, the one being called Judas Iscariot, having gone to the chief priests,
26:15 said, “What are you⁺ willing to give me, and I will betray Him to you⁺?” And they appointed to him thirty pieces of silver.
26:16 And from that time, he was seeking an opportunity, that he might betray Him.
26:17 And on the first of the Unleavened, the disciples came to Jesus, saying, “Where do You desire [that] we should prepare for You to eat the Passover?”
26:18 And He said, “Go into the city to a certain man and tell him, ‘The Teacher says, “My time is near; at your [house] I will keep the Passover with My disciples.”’”
26:19 And the disciples did as Jesus directed them and prepared the Passover.
26:20 And evening having come, He was reclining with the twelve disciples.
26:21 And [while] they are eating, He said to them, “Truly I say to you⁺ that one of you⁺ will betray Me.”
26:22 And being grieved exceedingly, they began, each one, to say to Him, “Is it I, Lord?”
26:23 And answering, He said, “The one having dipped the hand in the bowl with Me, he will betray Me.
26:24 Indeed the Son of Man goes as it has been written about Him; but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed. It would be better for him if he had not been born—that man.”
26:25 And Judas, who was betraying Him, answering, said, “Is it I, Rabbi?” He says to him, “You have said.”
26:26 Now [while] they are eating, Jesus, having taken bread and having blessed [it], broke [it], and having given [it] to the disciples, He said, “Take, eat; this is My body.”
26:27 And having taken a cup and having given thanks, He gave [it] to them, saying, “Drink of it, all of you.
26:28 For this is My blood of the covenant, being poured out for many for forgiveness of sins.
26:29 And I say to you⁺ [that] I shall not drink of this fruit of the vine from now until that day when I drink it anew with you⁺ in the kingdom of My Father.”
26:30 And having sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
26:31 Then Jesus says to them, “All of you⁺ will fall away because of Me during this night. For it has been written: ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.’
26:32 But I, after being raised, will go before you⁺ into Galilee.”
26:33 And answering, Peter said to Him, “Even if all will fall away because of You, I never will fall away.”
26:34 Jesus said to him, “Truly I say to you that during this night, before the rooster crows, you will deny Me three times.”
26:35 Peter says to Him, “Even if it were necessary for me to die with You, I will never deny You.” And all the disciples said likewise.
26:36 Then Jesus comes with them to a place called Gethsemane, and He says to the disciples, “Sit here until, having gone away over there, I shall pray.”
26:37 And having taken with [Him] Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, He began to be sorrowful and deeply distressed.
26:38 Then He says to them, “My soul is very sorrowful, even to death. Remain here and watch with Me.”
26:39 And having gone forward a little, He fell upon His face, praying and saying, “My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from Me. Nevertheless, not as I will, but as You.”
26:40 And He comes to the disciples and finds them sleeping. And He says to Peter, “So, were you⁺ not able to watch with Me one hour?
26:41 Watch and pray so that you⁺ might not enter into temptation. the spirit indeed [is] willing, but the flesh weak.”
26:42 Again, for a second time, having gone away, He prayed, saying, “My Father, if this is not possible to pass unless I drink it, Your will be done.”
26:43 And having come again, He found them sleeping, for their eyes were heavy.
26:44 And having left them again, having gone away, He prayed for the third time, having said the same thing again.
26:45 Then He comes to the disciples and says to them, “Sleep and take your⁺ rest later on. Behold, the hour has drawn near, and the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
26:46 Rise up, let us go! Behold, he who is betraying Me has drawn near!”
26:47 And [in] His still speaking, behold, Judas, one of the Twelve, came, and with him a great crowd with swords and clubs, from the chief priests and elders of the people.
26:48 And the one betraying Him gave them a sign, saying, “Whomever I shall kiss, it is He; seize Him.”
26:49 And having come up to Jesus immediately, he said, “Greetings, Rabbi!” and kissed Him.
26:50 And Jesus said to him, “Friend, for what are you come?” Then, having come, they laid hands on Jesus and seized Him.
26:51 And behold, one of those with Jesus, having stretched out the hand, drew his sword, and having struck the servant of the high priest, he cut off his ear.
26:52 Then Jesus says to him, “Return your sword into its place; for all those having taken the sword will perish by the sword.
26:53 Or do you think that I am not able to call upon My Father, and He will furnish to Me presently more than twelve legions of angels?
26:54 How then would the Scriptures be fulfilled that it must be so?”
26:55 In that hour, Jesus said to the crowds, “Did you⁺ come out with swords and clubs, as against a robber, to capture Me? Every day in the temple I was sitting teaching, and you⁺ did not seize Me.
26:56 And all this has come to pass so that the Scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled.” Then the disciples, all having forsaken Him, fled.
26:57 And those having seized Jesus led [Him] away to Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and the elders were assembled.
26:58 And Peter was following Him from afar, even to the court of the high priest. And having entered within, he was sitting with the guards to see the outcome.
26:59 And the chief priests and the whole Council were seeking false testimony against Jesus, so that they might put Him to death.
26:60 But they did not find [any], of many false witnesses having come forward. And at last, two having come forward,
26:61 they said, “This [man] has been saying, ‘I am able to demolish the temple of God and rebuild it in three days.’”
26:62 And the high priest, having risen up, said to Him, “Do You answer nothing? What do these witness against You?”
26:63 But Jesus was silent. And the high priest said to Him, “I adjure you by the living God that You tell us if You are the Christ, the Son of God.”
26:64 Jesus says to him, “You said [it]. But I say to you⁺, from now you⁺ will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of Power and coming upon the clouds of heaven.”
26:65 Then the high priest tears his garments, saying, “He blasphemed! Why do we have any more need of witnesses? Behold, now you⁺ heard the blasphemy.
26:66 What do you⁺ think?” And answering, they said, “He is deserving of death.”
26:67 Then they spat in His face and struck Him. And others slapped [Him],
26:68 saying, “Prophesy to us, Christ. Who is the one having struck You?”
26:69 And Peter was sitting outside in the court, and one servant girl came to him, saying, “You also were with Jesus the Galilean.”
26:70 And he denied [it] before all, saying, “I do not know what you say.”
26:71 And having gone out to the gateway, another saw him and says to those there, “This [man] was with Jesus of Nazareth.”
26:72 And again he denied [it] with an oath: “I do not know the man.”
26:73 And after a little while, those standing by, having come, said to Peter, “Truly you are of them also, for even your speech makes you evident.”
26:74 Then he began to curse and to swear, “I do not know the man!” And immediately a rooster crowed.
26:75 And Peter remembered the word of Jesus, [He] having said, “Before the rooster crows, you will deny Me three times.” And having gone out, he wept bitterly.
27:1 And morning having come, all the chief priests and the elders of the people took counsel against Jesus, so that they might put Him to death.
27:2 And having bound Him, they led [Him] away and delivered [Him] to Pilate the governor.
27:3 Then Judas, the one having delivered Him up, having seen that He was condemned, having regretted [it], returned the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders,
27:4 saying, “I sinned, having betrayed innocent blood.” But they said, “What [is it] to us? You will see.”
27:5 And having cast down the pieces of silver into the temple, he withdrew. And having gone away, he hanged himself.
27:6 And the chief priests, having taken the pieces of silver, said, “It is not lawful to put them into the treasury, since it is the price of blood.”
27:7 And having taken counsel, they bought with them the potter’s field for a burial place for foreigners.
27:8 Therefore that field was called Field of Blood until this day.
27:9 Then was fulfilled that having been spoken by the prophet Jeremiah, saying, “And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of the One having been priced, on whom a price was set by the sons of Israel,
27:10 and they gave them for the potter’s field, as the Lord directed me.”
27:11 Now Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor questioned Him, saying, “Are You the King of the Jews?” And Jesus said, “You say [it].”
27:12 And in His being accused by the chief priests and elders, He answered nothing.
27:13 Then Pilate says to Him, “Do You not hear how many things they witness against You?”
27:14 And He did not answer him, not even to one word, so as to amaze the governor exceedingly.
27:15 And at the feast, the governor had been accustomed to release one prisoner to the multitude, whom they willed.
27:16 And at that time they were holding a notable prisoner called Barabbas.
27:17 Therefore, [in] their being gathered together, Pilate said to them, “Whom do you⁺ desire [that] I shall release to you⁺? Barabbas, or Jesus who is called Christ?”
27:18 For he had known that they delivered Him up because of envy.
27:19 And [in] his sitting on the judgment seat, his wife sent to him, saying, “Nothing with you and that righteous [man], for I suffered many things in a dream today because of Him.”
27:20 But the chief priests and the elders persuaded the crowds that they should ask for Barabbas, and should destroy Jesus.
27:21 And answering, the governor said to them, “Which of the two do you⁺ desire [that] I shall release to you⁺?” And they said, “Barabbas.”
27:22 Pilate says to them, “What then should I do with Jesus who is called Christ?” They all say, “Let [Him] be crucified!”
27:23 And he said, “For what evil did He commit?” And they kept crying out all the more, saying, “Let [Him] be crucified!”
27:24 And Pilate, having seen that it availed nothing, but rather a riot is arising, having taken water, he washed the hands before the crowd, saying, “I am guiltless of the blood of this [man]. For yourselves you⁺ will see.”
27:25 And answering, all the people, said, “His blood [be] on us and on our children!”
27:26 Then he released Barabbas to them. And having flogged Jesus, He delivered [Him] up so that He might be crucified.
27:27 Then the soldiers of the governor, having taken with [them] Jesus into the Praetorium, gathered the whole cohort before Him.
27:28 And having stripped Him, they put a scarlet robe around Him.
27:29 And having twisted together a crown of thorns, they put [it] on His head, and a reed in His right hand; and having bowed the knees before Him, they mocked Him, saying, “Hail, King of the Jews!”
27:30 And having spit upon Him, they took the reed and kept striking [Him] on His head.
27:31 And when they had mocked Him, they took the robe off Him, and they put His garments on Him and led Him away to crucify [Him].
27:32 And going out, they found a man of Cyrene named Simon. They compelled him that he might carry His cross.
27:33 And having come to a place called Golgotha, which is called Place of a Skull,
27:34 they gave Him wine to drink, mixed with gall; and having tasted [it], He was not willing to drink [it].
27:35 And having crucified Him, they divided His garments, casting a lot.
27:36 And sitting down, they were guarding Him there.
27:37 And they put up over His head the written accusation against Him: THIS IS JESUS, THE KING OF THE JEWS.
27:38 At that time two robbers are crucified with Him, one at the right hand and one at the left.
27:39 And those passing by kept railing at Him, wagging their heads
27:40 and saying, “The One demolishing the temple and building [it] in three days, save Yourself! If You are the Son of God, also come down from the cross!”
27:41 Likewise also the chief priests, mocking, with the scribes and elders, were saying,
27:42 “He saved others. He is not able to save Himself. He is King of Israel! Let Him come down now from the cross, and we will believe in Him.
27:43 He has trusted on God. Let Him deliver [Him] now if He wants Him, for He said, ‘I am the Son of God.’”
27:44 And likewise even the robbers, those having been crucified with Him, were upbraiding Him.
27:45 And from the sixth hour darkness was over all the land until the ninth hour.
27:46 And about the ninth hour, Jesus cried out in a loud voice, saying, “Eli, Eli, lema sabachthani?” That is, “My God, My God, why did You forsake Me?”
27:47 And some of those standing there, having heard, were saying, “This [man] calls Elijah.”
27:48 And immediately one of them, having run and having taken a sponge, and having filled [it] with vinegar and having put [it] on a reed, gave Him to drink.
27:49 And the rest were saying, “Let [it] be. Let us see whether Elijah comes to save Him.”
27:50 And Jesus, having cried again in a loud voice, yielded up [His] spirit.
27:51 And behold, the veil of the temple was torn into two from top to bottom. And the earth was shaken, and the rocks were split.
27:52 And the tombs were opened, and many bodies of the saints having fallen asleep were raised.
27:53 And having gone forth out of the tombs after His resurrection, they entered into the holy city and appeared to many.
27:54 And the centurion and those with him guarding Jesus, having seen the earthquake and the things taking place, feared greatly, saying, “Truly this was God’s Son.”
27:55 And many women were there, looking on from afar off, who followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering to Him—
27:56 among whom was Mary Magdalene—also Mary the mother of James and Joseph, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.
27:57 And evening having come, a rich man from Arimathea named Joseph came, who himself also was discipled to Jesus.
27:58 Having gone to Pilate, he asked for the body of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded it to be given up.
27:59 And Joseph, having taken the body, wrapped it in a clean linen cloth
27:60 and placed it in his new tomb, which he had cut in the rock. And having rolled a great stone to the door of the tomb, he went away.
27:61 And Mary Magdalene was there, and the other Mary, sitting opposite the tomb.
27:62 And the next day, which is after the Preparation, the chief priests and the Pharisees were gathered together before Pilate,
27:63 saying, “Sir, we have remembered how that deceiver, while living, said, ‘After three days I arise.’
27:64 Therefore command the tomb to be secured until the third day, lest ever His disciples, having come, steal Him away and say to the people, ‘He is risen from the dead.’ And the last deception will be worse than the first.”
27:65 Pilate said to them, “You⁺ have a guard. Go, make [it as] secure as you⁺ have known.”
27:66 And having gone with the guard, they made the tomb secure, having sealed the stone.
28:1 Now after the Sabbaths, it being dawn toward the first of the Sabbaths, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary came to see the tomb.
28:2 And behold, there was a great earthquake; for an angel of the Lord, having descended out of heaven and having come, rolled away the stone and was sitting upon it.
28:3 And his appearance was like lightning, and his clothing white as snow.
28:4 And those keeping guard trembled from fear of him, and they became like dead [men].
28:5 And answering, the angel said to the women, “Do not be afraid, for I know that you⁺ seek Jesus, the One having been crucified.
28:6 He is not here, for He is risen, as He said! Come, see the place where He was lying.
28:7 And having gone quickly, say to His disciples, ‘He is risen from the dead, and behold, He goes before you⁺ into Galilee; there you⁺ will see Him.’ Behold, I have told you⁺.”
28:8 And having gone out quickly from the tomb with fear and great joy, they ran to tell His disciples.
28:9 And behold, Jesus met them, saying, “Greetings!” And having come, they took hold of His feet and worshiped Him.
28:10 Then Jesus says to them, “Do not be afraid. Go, tell My brothers, so that they should go into Galilee. And there they will see Me.”
28:11 And [in] their going, behold, some of the guard, having gone into the city, reported to the chief priests all the things having come to pass.
28:12 And having been gathered together with the elders and having taken counsel, they gave many pieces of silver to the soldiers,
28:13 saying, “Say, ‘His disciples, having come by night, stole Him—we being asleep.’
28:14 And if this is heard by the governor, we will persuade him, and we will keep you⁺ out of trouble.”
28:15 And having taken the pieces of silver, they did as they were instructed. And this report was spread abroad among the Jews until the present day.
28:16 And the eleven disciples went into Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus assigned them.
28:17 And having seen Him, they worshiped; but some doubted.
28:18 And having come near, Jesus spoke to them, saying, “All authority in heaven and on the earth was given to Me.
28:19 Therefore, having gone, disciple all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit,
28:20 teaching them to observe all things, as much as I commanded you⁺. And behold, I am with you⁺ all the days, until the consummation of the age.”
